Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Space Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/spacepol

The economics of outer space: Regulation, market failures, and
industry prospects
Anelí Bongers a, Benedetto Molinari a,b,* , Sébastien Rouillon c , José L. Torres a
a

Department of Economic Theory and History, University of Málaga, Spain
RCEA, United States
c
BxSE, University of Bordeaux, France
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

JEL classification:
O33
Q53
Q55
L95

The past decade has witnessed a rapid expansion of human activity in Earth's orbit, elevating outer space as a
domain of growing scientific, economic, and strategic importance. Yet this emerging sector is beset by market
failures and regulatory gaps that hinder its growth and long-term viability: ill-defined property rights over
extraterrestrial resources, orbital congestion, debris pollution, and the latent risk of weaponing commercial
assets. The continued emergence of novel commercial applications is poised to amplify congestion and pollution
frictions, bringing environmental concerns to the forefront of space policy analysis. This paper surveys foun­
dational literature on the economics of outer space, highlighting connections to established areas of environ­
mental, resource, and public economics. We argue that timely intervention is essential to unlock the sector’s
economic potential and to mitigate conflict among spacefaring actors, and we identify open questions to guide
future research in this promising and largely unexplored field.

Keywords:
Outer space
Satellites
Earth's orbit
Orbital debris
Anti-satellite weapon systems
Space industry
Satellite data

1. Introduction
Since the beginning of time humans have been fascinated by the
Universe and finally, during the last half century the conquered space
travel and today outer space has become a vital environment for com­
mercial, scientific, and military activities. In the foreseeable future,
humans will colonize space, extending the limits of the Earth to human
life, and there are already some embryonic plans for creating colonies in
the Lagrange points, the Moon, other natural satellites, and Mars.
Spacecraft developed during the 20th Century are, in a way, equivalent
to the wooden ships that allowed the Vikings and Christopher Columbus
to cross the Atlantic Ocean to discover the “New World”. Technological
progress, combined with curiosity and the need to understand and desire
for exploration and economic exploitation of outer space, will pass over
the economic frontiers imposed by the geophysical limits of planet
Earth, expanding the finite endowment of natural and energy resources.

This will lead to the development of new technologies and new goods
that are impossible to produce on Earth, all leading to profound eco­
nomic and social changes that are yet to be established.
Although human exploration and economic exploitation of outer
space have been relatively recent (the first human-made spacecraft
successful launch occurred in 1957), several market failures and other
troublesome economic, legal, and political issues have arisen at rocket
speed as commercial, military, and scientific activities in space are in
continuous expansion. No agent (national governments or international
organizations) has authority over property rights of space, except
spacecraft ownership, and therefore, human activities in space,
excluding current commercial satellites' orbit location and electromag­
netic spectrum in GEO orbit,1 are not subject to any centralized regu­
lation or property rights scheme, being an example of a
multidimensional common pool resource. As such, outer space is thus
subject to economic failures as other international commons on the

* Corresponding author. University of Málaga, Spain
E-mail address: bmolinari@uma.es (B. Molinari).
1
Geostationary (GEO) orbit is a particular orbit also referred to as a (circular) geosynchronous equatorial orbit (GEO) at 35,786 km in altitude above Earth's
equator. An object in such an orbit has an orbital period equal to Earth's rotational period, one sidereal day, and so it remains in a fixed point to the Earth. This is an
excellent advantage for satellite communication, navigation, positioning, and weather observation. In short, Earth’ orbit is divided in Low Earth Orbit (LEO), Medium
Earth Orbit (MEO), and GEO.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spacepol.2026.101765
Received 27 February 2025; Received in revised form 19 September 2025; Accepted 19 April 2026
0265-9646/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Please cite this article as: Anelí Bongers et al., Space Policy, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spacepol.2026.101765

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

Earth like fisheries in international waters, high-seas sailing, atmo­
sphere pollution, or Antarctica exploitation. However, outer space's
physical characteristics differ from those of Earth (vacuum, near-zero
gravity, extreme temperatures, etc.). The heterogeneity of outer space
resources is a crucial conditioning factor that can introduce new chal­
lenges in organizing human activities in outer space.
The only international agreement that established a list of basic
principles to regulate human activity outside the planet Earth is the
“Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Explora­
tion and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies”, referred to as the Outer Space Treaty (OST). The OST enu­
merates a list of basic principles for human activity in outer space to be
followed by nations (not private companies, as the Treaty was signed in
1967 when only governments had the technology and financial re­
sources to access space), including freedom of access and exploration, no
sovereignty, and peaceful purposes. The basic principles of the OST were
later extended by several agreements and conventions on more specific
issues. However, the principles instituted in the OST represent a set of
basic rules with a minimal scope to which countries pursuing activities
in outer space are subject, and it cannot be considered a full-operational
regulatory framework, but where the “first come, first serves” principle
seems to dominate.
Although the dawn of a new field in economics called “Economics of
Outer Space” is very recent, the rising importance of outer space for
economic and social development is beyond discussion. Nowadays,
satellites and other spacecraft offer various critical services to Earth's
consumers, including broadcasting and telecommunications services,
the Internet, positioning services, Earth observation and remote sensing,
etc., apart from scientific and vital defense and security activities.
However, this is just the beginning of history, and several new forms of
commercial exploitation of outer space will appear in the future with the
development of a highly autonomous in-orbit industry.
Given technological advances in spacecraft manufacturing and
launching systems and the increasing presence of humans in outer space,
outer space has become the new economic frontier [1]. In the initial
stages, space exploration was conducted by countries, mainly by the U.S.
and the Soviet Union, given the existing technological and financial
barriers. However, reductions in costs, development, and access to new
technologies have dramatically democratized access to outer space,
increasing the number of spacefaring nations and private commercial
operators [2]. A large variety of industries are expected to be developed
in the near future, in addition to already well-established industries,
other than military and scientific activities. Industries such as space
manufacturing of unique goods for customers on Earth using micro­
gravity, vacuum, and extreme temperatures (Patel, 2019), in-space
manufacturing and maintenance and repair services [3], asteroid min­
ing [4], and space tourism [5], among others, are expected to be
developed in the foreseeable future, further congesting outer space and
generating more space pollution. Meanwhile, the strategic value of outer
space for defense and security issues is expanding rapidly, increasing the
militarization and weaponization of space and transforming outer space
into a potential battlefield for central powers.
All these transformations raise several troublesome issues that de­
mand attention from economists because they will have increasing
importance for humankind's economic and social development.
Although most of these issues are economic, outer space has yet to
receive much attention from economists. This contrasts with other
fields, such as law, where considerable efforts are being made to assess
the legal implications of managing human activities in outer space.
Human activities in outer space involve several current and incoming
economic issues related to property rights, market regulations, orbit
slots, congestion, pollution, and exploitation of natural resources, which
should be addressed as soon as possible to mitigate conflicts among
spacefaring agents and loss of welfare for the whole Earth planet.
The seminal foundations for the economics of outer space were
constructed by O'Neill [6] and Sandler and Schulze [7]. O'Neill [6] was

the first to study the feasibility of space human colonies from an eco­
nomic perspective. Sandler and Schulze [7] path-breaking contribution
enumerated and studied a few economic issues related to commercial
and other activities in outer space, including broadband spectrum, rights
over the geostationary orbit, and the risk of collision of human-produced
objects. However, from these seminal contributions, and perhaps sur­
prisingly, little advancement has been observed in the economic litera­
ture on the study of outer space and related economic issues, despite the
critical nature of some of them as orbital congestion and pollution that
can put at risk the very possibility of space exploration and exploitation.
The paper reviewed advances in the economics of outer space, especially
in relation to the pressing issues of pollution and congestion. We first
identify a few key economic issues related to human activity in outer
space and, second, by reviewing the literature that tackles these issues,
including topics from regulation to pollution and from natural resources
to defense economics. This new field of study will be somehow con­
nected with many existing well-established economics fields, such as
production and capital accumulation; automation and technological
change; collective decision-making; public economics and international
public goods; natural resources; environmental economics; national se­
curity and defense; data for measurement of economic activity and
policy evaluation, among others. Existing economic analysis tools and
techniques can be applied to the study of this “new economy”, which
shares some similar characteristics with other standard markets on Earth
but also presents some distinct and unique features, given the physical
characteristics of outer space, that will demand new models and alter­
native approaches that combine economics modeling with some phys­
ical and space models, similarly to what is observed in recent advances
in the fields of energy, resources, and environmental economics. The
high velocity of space technological progress and the milestones ach­
ieved in recent decades, along with the essential economic implications
of the outer space conquest, demand urgent attention from economists
before market failures reach an unsolvable threshold, leading to per­
manent welfare losses for all humanity and the dawn of political and
security conflicts of a global nature.
Along the rest of the paper, we will review some key selected topics
on the economics of outer space, discussing their connection with
existing fields in economics.2 Section 2 presents some data about the
importance of the outer space sector from a physical and economic
perspective. Section 3 focuses on the global regulatory framework for
human activities in outer space and describes some characteristics of
outer space as an extra-terrestrial global shared pool resource. Section 4
focuses on congestion problems related to orbit and spectrum. Section 5
explores an issue attracting more attention from economists: space
pollution in the form of orbital debris. Section 6 reviews studies which
apply data from Earth's observation satellites to measure economic ac­
tivity and growth. This is a promising avenue that can dramatically
transform how applied economics is conducted as the availability of
economic data increases with higher frequency data and new spatial
units. Section 7 focuses on using space for security and defense and the
consequences of the increasing militarization of outer space. Section 8
explores several industries, including in-orbit manufacturing, asteroid
mining, orbital services, etc., which are incipient but with excellent
development potential. Section 9 offers a discussion and comparative
analysis of challenges of space industry. Finally, Section 10 collects the
main conclusions and suggests future research directions in this prom­
ising and highly unexplored research area.
2. Basic data on human activity in outer space
Human exploration of outer space started in 1957 with the first
successful launch of an artificial satellite (Sputnik I) into orbit. This
2
Interstellar trade, tax, and finance literature, pioneered by [8], is deliber­
ately not covered in this survey.

2

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

initial launch fueled a space race between the United States and the
Soviet Union, the only two countries with enough financial resources to
produce the necessary technology to insert a human-made spacecraft
into the Earth's orbit at that time. Sixty years later, the number of
spacefaring nations has increased to twelve. A regional space organi­
zation, the European Space Agency (ESA), includes 22 other countries
with indigenous launch systems. Nations with satellites have increased
to 83, there are 13 private satellite operators, and seven private com­
panies have their own orbital launch systems.
All this expanding human activity in outer space has resulted in
many human-made objects travelling at high speed in the Earth's orbit.
Orbit is not only populated by operational satellites and other space­
craft, as space stations, but also by derelict dead satellites, rocket bodies,
and a large variety of orbital debris produced from launching opera­
tions, breakup and explosion of satellites and rocket engines, collisions
between operational satellites and orbital debris, and even fragments
intentionally produced by anti-satellite military tests.3
Table 1 shows some basic data about human activity in the Earth's
orbits and the number of orbital debris, as the ESA estimated in
December 2023. Most activity occurs at Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO, between
200 and 2000 km) and Geostationary Orbit (GEO, at 35,786 km). Since
the beginning of space exploration, a total of 6910 successful launches
has been realized. This figure differs from the number of spacecrafts
launched in orbit (about 21,620), as a launch can include more than one
satellite or spacecraft. Indeed, the relationship between launches and
new satellites in orbit has changed dramatically in recent years due to
new varieties of small and micro satellites and launch systems' higher
power and payload capacity. The number of satellites in Earth's orbit at
May 2025 (ESA) is over 14,240, of which about 11,700 are operational.
The total number of pieces of debris tracked by the United States Space
Surveillance Network (SSN), including derelict satellites, rocket bodies,
and debris fragments is 41,950, and the estimate number of debris larger
than 10 cm by the ESA's model is of 44,700. The number of registered
incidents, including break-ups, explosions, collisions, or anomalous
events resulting in fragmentation, is more than 640. The most significant
incident was the collision on February 10, 2009, of an active US com­
munications satellite (Iridium 33) with a defunct Russian military
communications satellite (Kosmos 2251). Both satellites were destroyed
in the collision, producing around 2200 pieces of new tracked debris
with a size of at least 5 cm [9]. However, the most critical incident (an
anti-satellite military test) was intentional, resulting in the destruction
of the Fengyun-1C (a Chinese satellite) on January 1, 2011, by a kinetic
weapon producing an estimated 3037 pieces of new tracked debris.
The standard classification of orbital debris depends on its size and
the technical possibility of tracking it. Projections obtained using
different evolutionary models for debris dynamics population (for

example, the LEO-to-GEO NASA's Environment Debris Model, LEGEND,
[10]) have estimated amounts of around 34,000 pieces of debris larger
than 10 cm diameter, 900,000 objects between 1 cm and 10 cm, and
over 128,000,000 fragments between 1 mm and 1 cm. The number of
debris objects estimated by the MASTER-8 model (the ESA's Meteoroid
and Space Debris Terrestrial Environment Reference model) is 36,500
objects larger than 10 cm, 1,000,000 fragments greater than 1 cm to
10 cm, and 130 million fragments greater than 1 mm to 1 cm [11]. The
destruction power of debris smaller than 1 cm is estimated to be low and
non-fatal in the case of a collision with a satellite. However, debris larger
than 1 cm is potentially deadly due to the high velocity of the impact
(between 5 and 10 km per second).
Fig. 1 plots the number of launches per year using information
collected from the DISCOS database and the Union of Concerned Sci­
entists (UCS) satellite database. In the first years of space exploration,
the number of launches increased rapidly due to the space race between
the United States and the Soviet Union. From 1968 on, the number of
launches stabilized and even decreased. The trend returned to be posi­
tive from 2005, with a trend-break in the last two years (2022 and 2023)
due to private firms’ activity and the launching of satellite
constellations.
Fig. 2 plots the number of satellites and other spacecrafts inserted
into orbit. Figures differ from launch ones since each rocket can carry
several payloads. Indeed, we can observe how the number of satellites
per launch has dramatically increased in the last year, coinciding with
the launch of satellite constellations. More powerful launch vehicles and
the reduction in the size and mass of satellites explain those figures.
Fig. 3 shows how the total number of catalogued objects in orbit has
evolved.4 Some jumps in the number of objects can be observed in some
years, caused by accidental break-ups, explosions, collisions, and the
deliberate destruction of targets in anti-satellite (ASAT) tests. The
number of SSN catalogued objects has been increasing steadily, except in
some years, such as 1989 and 1990, coinciding with the disintegration of
the Soviet Union, which significantly decreased the number of launches.
However, debris creation has accelerated in the second half of the
decade, beginning in 2010 and continuing in the last three years due to
collisions with debris and additional ASAT tests. The number of new
objects catalogued in orbit has increased significantly in the last two
decades. There are three main reasons for this. First, there is an

Table 1
Data on the activity in outer space.
Successful launches
Successful satellite launches in Earth orbit
Satellites in Earth's orbit
Operational satellites
Debris tracked by SSN
Incidents resulting in fragmentation
Debris >10 cm
Debris between 1 cm and 10 cm
Debris between 1 mm and 1 cm

6910
21,620
14,240
11,700
41,950
650
44,700
1,200,000
140,000,000

Fig. 1. Number of rockets launches per year (1957-2024).
Source: UCS, DISCOS

Source: ESA (May 2025)

4
The actual figure for debris is larger than the number of catalogued objects.
The US Space Surveillance Network (SSN) can only track objects larger than 510 cm in LEO and only larger than 30 cm to 1m in GEO, and only objects with a
known origin are catalogued.

3

As defined by NASA, orbital debris is any human-made object in orbit that
no longer serves a useful purpose, including spacecraft fragments and retired
satellites.
3

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

space industry contributed 129,9 billion dollars to the U.S. economy in
2021 (0.6% of GDP), with 360,000 full- and part-time jobs in the private
space industry.
The Space Foundation [14] estimates the global space economy will
impact 546 billion dollars in 2022, amounting to 0.63% of entire world's
GDP. The Satellite Industry Association [15] estimates that the global
space economy accounts for $384 billion for 2022, approximately 0.45%
of global GDP. According to the estimates, the space economy is still a
relatively small fraction of the whole economy quantitatively, although
some satellite services are vital for consumers. Corrado et al. [16]
explore the connections between space economy and economic growth,
measuring space activity spillovers. They find that space activity spill­
overs are of high magnitude, although with a negative trend over time.
Adilov et al. [17] estimate the value of 3369 satellites in orbit in 2020 as
a function of their mass and the expected cost of satellite losses by col­
lisions. They estimate the total value for satellite assets between 181,618
and 217,942 million dollars and expected losses between 85,97 and 103,
15 million. Adilov et al. [18] extend previous estimations to different
orbits, with economic losses concentrated in the low-Earth orbit (LEO).

Fig. 2. Number of satellites placed into orbit (1957-2024).
Source: UCS, DISCOS.

3. Regulation of outer space: a global common pool of resources
The first economic challenge associated with human activity in outer
space is related to the global regulation of this environment, particularly
concerning property rights over natural objects and other space re­
sources. Martin-Lawson et al. [19] considers outer space an area beyond
national jurisdiction (ABNJ) such as oceans, polar regions, and the cy­
berspace. Although outer space has several characteristics of a global
shared pool resource, thus making it susceptible to similar economic
failures as the ones observed with international commons on Earth, it
also possesses unique attributes due to its distinctly different physical
environment, thus calling for specific regulation. In their “The Eco­
nomics of Outer Space”, Sandler and Schulze [7] were among the firsts
to acknowledge outer space as a common property resource and to
survey the economic issues related to its exploitation for business
activities.
Regulatory challenges have been evident from the early days
following the initial exploration of outer space, prompting the interna­
tional community to establish the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) as an independent authority. Its main task was spear­
heading the development of a body of laws and regulations for space
activities and launches. These norms and related issues have studied
from legal and economic perspectives in academic literature. While a
detailed survey of the first is beyond the scope of this paper, at least a
significant contribution is worth noting. The book “Space Law: A Trea­
tise” by Lyall and Larsen [20], now in its second edition, provides a
coherent and comprehensive examination of outer space from a legal
standpoint. The treatise not only discusses the role of the ITU but also
addresses developments across all space applications, including Low
Earth Orbit (LEO) activities, such as space tourism and Geostationary
Orbit (GEO) activities like telecommunications. In addition to the gen­
eral coverage provided by international space law, there now exists a
specific body of law known as Orbital Law, which deals with legal issues
unique to the exploitation of Earth's orbits. As Blount [21] explains, this
legal framework addresses resource allocations, potential conflicts, and
established coordination mechanisms, offering a focused legal analysis
of the challenges presented by the unique characteristics and critical
importance of Earth's orbital environments.
In 1967, under the auspices of the United Nations it was drafted the
Outer Space Treaty (OST). Formally known as the “Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies”, until now it is
the sole international agreement establishing a set of principles for
regulating human activity beyond Earth, aside from ITU regulations
concerning GEO commercial activity. The OST outlines the fundamental
principles to adhere in space exploration by nation-states, which at the

Fig. 3. Catalogued objects in orbit 1957-2024.
Source: US Space Surveillance Network (SSN) and Space-track.org

increasing number of accidental collisions between satellites and debris
(the most important has been the collision of a commercial American
communication satellite, the Iridium-33, with Cosmos 2251, a derelict
Soviet Union military satellite, on February 10, 2009). Second, the
number of ASAT tests involving the physical destruction of the target has
increased significantly during the last two decades as the number of
countries with this type of weapon system has expanded. Third, tracking
technology is constantly progressing. The Space Fence radar of the
United States Space Force (USSF), becoming operational in March 2020,
has increased the capability of tracking and accurately measuring space
objects. Finally, the number of new catalogued objects in orbit will
experience significant growth in the following years with the advent of
satellite constellations at LEO.5
Apart from the increasing number of satellites and other spacecraft in
orbit, the economic impact of the space industry has continued growing
at high rates. Weinzierl [1] advanced that commercial activities in space
generate around $300 billion in annual revenues. Whealan-George [12],
using input-output tables for the U.S. economy, estimates an economic
impact of the commercial space industry of approximately $38 billion,
or 2.0% of the total U.S. GDP, accounting for 195,484 full- and part-time
jobs for 2016. The Bureau of Economic Analysis [13] estimates that the

5
As of June 2024, the SpaceX Starlink constellation has over 6229 opera­
tional satellites (6738 launched) from a planned total of 12,000 satellites by
2026 (McDowell, 2024).

4

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

time were the only entities with the technological and financial capacity
for it. These principles included freedom of access and exploration, a
prohibition on claiming sovereignty and a commitment to peaceful
purposes. Except for spacecraft ownership, property rights are explicitly
excluded under the OST.
While the basic principles of the OST have been expanded upon by
subsequent agreements and conventions addressing more specific issues,
they represent a relatively limited set of rules that govern activities in
outer space and do not constitute a comprehensive regulatory frame­
work. The prevailing principle “first come, first served” is revealing all
the inadequacy of current regulations. The consequences of this regu­
latory shortfall were already articulated by Hardin [22], who famously
argued that “Freedom in a common brings ruin to all.” Later, Ostrom
[23,24] demonstrated that avoiding the “tragedy of the commons” is
possible without resorting to privatization or heavy-handed government
regulation.
Outer space presents an ideal setting to explore the governance
possibilities suggested by Ostrom [24]. Macauley [25] argues that
regulation suits specific outer space resources but not others. Weeden
and Chow [26] explore the potential applications of Ostrom's principles
for managing outer space to circumvent privatization and centralization.
They advocate for adopting “adaptative governance,” as proposed by
Dietz, Ostrom, and Stern [27]. Their research assesses the applicability
of the eight principles outlined by Ostrom [23] to near-Earth orbit,
which they liken to parking garages, exploring how these principles
could be adapted to this unique context. A related issue stems from the
need for defined sovereignty limits in space. This challenge originates
from difficulties in establishing precise boundaries for a country's
airspace. Theoretically, outer space begins at an altitude of approxi­
mately 100 km (the Kármán line). However, in practice, the boundaries
of a nation's airspace sovereignty are often determined by the range of its
air defense capabilities. Properly regulating these limits is crucial to
prevent future conflicts as air defense technologies evolve.
From an economic perspective, it is crucial to recognize that the
Outer Space Treaty (OST) currently conflicts with the planned com­
mercial exploitation of outer space resources, such as asteroid mining.
When the OST was initially signed, only nation-states could explore
space and no private companies had access. Now that technological
progress has democratized access to space, increasing the number of
countries and companies operating satellites, the necessity for a
comprehensive revision of the OST is compelling, with economic con­
siderations playing a central role in shaping future regulations.
Excluding a specific entity from using outer space is challenging, even
though this could change with further technological advancements.
Considering the anticipated regulation of outer space activities and the
political dynamics involved in such regulatory processes among space­
faring nations, examining various economic questions related to this
issue is also crucial. Weeden and Chow [26] argued that outer space
comprises a variety of common pool resources, each with unique char­
acteristics that necessitate a tailored governance framework. Chow [28]
assessed the implications of a regulatory framework for current and
future activities in space. Property rights in outer space will be also a
source of conflicts among central spacefaring nations. Outer space ex­
hibits “subtractability of use” characteristic like other shared resources.
Problems are arising with issues such as protecting human lunar heri­
tage, which would imply property rights over the place where lunar
missions are carried out by the U.S., the Soviet Union, and China [29]. In
general, it remains to be seen whether the unique physical characteris­
tics of outer space necessitate a powerful sovereign or, conversely, if
outer space should remain a realm of minimal governance.

surprisingly, the space itself. Space around the Earth is vast but not
infinite and a pressing problem arising from under-regulation is that
some space resources are exhausting. Present commercial and military
activities do not distribute satellites and other spacecraft uniformly at
different altitudes, but they are concentrated in certain orbits of high
value where satellites remain fixed above the same position over the
Earth. This valuable feature can be achieved by continuously reposi­
tioning satellites with maneuvers that are costly in terms of fuel and
operational life, or by positioning them in particular orbit slots called
Geostationary or Geosynchronous Equatorial Orbits (GEO). Here, the
cross-gravity of celestial bodies in the solar system combined with ve­
locity establishes an orbital period that matches Earth's rotation period,
thus maintaining devices constantly above the same point over Earth's
surface without running engines. Communication, weather, and GPS are
examples of satellites positioned in GEO orbits, which are located at an
altitude of approximately 35,786 and have a radius of approximately
42,157 km.
Available slots at GEO are relatively abundant but far from infinite,
considering that satellites require a minimum distance between each
other to avoid electronic interferences. Moreover, fast-peace techno­
logical progress largely increased the number of players in the market
for satellite applications during the last two decades, now counting
many more national space agencies beyond the ones of US and Russia,
plus many private firms, satellite constellations, space mining firms, etc.
In fact, space is already exhausted in some orbits, where no slots are
available for new satellites.
Spectrum frequencies and orbital slots are assigned by the Interna­
tional Telecommunication Union of the United Nations (ITU). The
allocation is done on a first-come, first-served principle, and it is costless
and unlimited in time, except for some restrictions on the period be­
tween the permission approval and the actual moment the satellite must
be in orbit and operational. In addition, slot rights are given for the
operational life of satellites, but operators typically replace old satellites
with new ones, thus making slot rights indefinitely in practice. Although
it establishes some rules, ITU has no actual enforcement power on
spacefaring actors and therefore, space activities occur in a highly nonregulated market. The whole organization and regulatory environment
are clearly unfit for present market size, number of players, and actual
development and commercial interest in outer space activities. In this
context, the under-regulation of outer space established in the 1960s is
rapidly leading to overuse of resources and related environmental
problems as expected in any tragedy-of-the-commons situation.
From an economics perspective, the first analysis of the satellite
market appeared in the mid-seventies, typically pursuing approaches on
cost minimization. Snow [30], Early et al. [31], and Pritchard [32] are
early attempts to apply economic analysis to the satellite services mar­
ket. Snow [30] applied a model of investment cost minimization to the
case of satellite communications. He used INTELSAT data to calibrate
the model and obtain the optimal investment planning in satellite ca­
pacity and replenishment times. Early et al. [31] also used INTELSAT
data to analyze the amount of R&D required to support a satellite
communication system and related this expenditure to determining
hardware investment costs. The authors also provided a proper eco­
nomic optimization to determine the most profitable station size for new
entrants in the INTELSAT system, i.e., they compared small stations with
lower initial cost, but higher space segment expense as opposed to
largest stations with higher initial cost but lower space segment expense.
Early et al. [31] were the first to acknowledge the interest in treating
orbits and satellites with proper economic analyses, given that “The
economic viability of these systems is no longer questioned. Instead, new
questions relating to system optimization […] are of increasing interest”. In
this line, Pritchard [32] provided estimations on the costs of satellite
communications systems and some insights on minimizing such costs. In
particular, he acknowledged the relationship between satellite systems
costs and some satellite design features. He suggested deciding on con­
struction design to minimize such costs, e.g., satellite lifetime and

4. Congestion in outer space: the market for orbits and
electromagnetic spectrum
When considering outer space as an environment for business ac­
tivity, its main resources are transmission frequencies and, perhaps
5

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

adequate radiated power.
The possibility of congestion in outer space was first conjectured in
the economics literature during the 1980s by Sandler and Schulze [7].
They discussed allocation problems because of externalities and public
goods related to outer-space activities. For example, they constructed a
formal economic model for the optimal allocation of telecommunication
satellites and examined the efficiency of the existing institutional
structure. Wihlborg and Wijkman [33] also treated space as a shared
pool of resources and conjectured about congestion problems in geo­
stationary orbits. They suggested using market mechanisms to allocate
resources efficiently in space and compared the first-come, first-served
regime with right vs. auction regimes. They also argued about the effi­
ciency of these regimes compared to the proposal to carve up space
resources and distribute the parts among nations. At the time, there were
few satellites in orbit, and therefore, their analysis remained theoretical
and speculative, even though they were pioneers and forward-thinking.
Sometime later, the view of orbits as a finite shared pool of resources
subject to pollution and congestion was embraced in law journals.6
Levin [34] invoked a proper economic analysis of the values of radio
spectrum and geostationary orbits, and Levin (1984) propose a political
economy plan to allocate orbit resources through mechanisms designed
to introduce market incentives. Finally, Macauley [35] studied the ef­
fects of technical change on the rationing of the usage of the electro­
magnetic spectrum for communications satellites by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
The debate for an efficient allocation of orbit slots and spectrum
entirely took off in the 1990s, when the focus of the literature shifted
from the first conjectures on market mechanisms to allocate spectrum
efficiently and orbits to a proper treat of outer space as a shared pool of
resources. The change of perception and the urge for regulations were
possibly triggered by some events during the 1980s, such as the
increasing number of telecommunication satellites in orbit, the case of
Tonga (in 1990 the Tongan Government filed for 16 geostationary
orbiting positions with the ITU with no intention of using them, only to
open an auction for their annual renting), and the case of equatorial
countries (the equatorial States raised sovereignty claims on the GEO
over their territories in the Bogota Declaration in 1976). These events
acknowledged the economic, environmental and social issues implied by
human activities in outer space and stimulated a new branch of litera­
ture. Levin [36] discusses various proposals to create an international
commodities market for spectrum frequencies and auction off the rights
to use them. Levin [37] extends the previous framework to the possi­
bility of trading rights to orbital slots and spectrum. From Thompson
[38], we learn that a few years later, space scarcity and satellite
congestion were already taken as a starting point for a discussion on
Earth's orbits, which, in the case of Thompson, hinged on fairness and
ethical considerations of leaving orbit permits to market dynamics. He
argued that the consequent price for orbital slots set in a non-regulated
market would put orbits “out of the range of all but financial behemoths”.
He also discusses the case of Tonga as an example of malpractice with
space resources. While Thompson was invoking more fairness principles
in the centralized allocation, at the same time, “an extensive economics
literature alleges that the non-market administrative allocative procedures
now in place are highly inefficient,” as noted by Macauley [39], who
developed a model to estimate the economic value of communications
satellites at geostationary orbit and the welfare cost of existing
non-market administrative allocative procedures. Along the same line,
Shibusawa [40] proposed a conceptual model to optimize the location of
telecommunication satellites by maximizing social welfare in terms of
utility as in standard economics models and accounting for the negative
externalities of satellite congestion.
Regarding the normative aspects of satellite congestion, Macauley

[39] analyzed the welfare cost of existing non-market administrative
allocative procedures for communications satellites at geostationary
orbit. Macauley [41] offered an introduction to the variety of ways
economics can contribute to understanding the value of space. She
focused explicitly on space as a natural resource subject to scarcity and
how its scarcity might be managed to exploit its economic benefits best.
A more recent contribution is Adilov et al. [42], who show that
incumbent satellite operators have incentives not to utilize a fraction of
their assigned spectrum and orbital slots. Indeed, these operators have
incentives to keep non-operational satellites in orbit as a barrier to entry
for other operators, increasing prices and reducing output and social
welfare. Adilov et al. [43] propose to issue interest-bearing performance
bonds to provide an incentive mechanism for deorbiting satellites with
minimal effect on firms' operating costs. A similar proposal is done by
Brownhall et al. [44].
Further work remains to be done in this area to study the market for
satellites from an industrial organization and strategic commercial
policy perspectives, considering that several private firms planned to
insert thousands of satellites (satellite constellations) in orbit, further
increasing congestion in LEO, the already most congested orbit.
Oligopolistic models such as those of Guyot and Rouillon [45], Guyot,
Rao and Rouillon [46], and Bernhard, Deschamps and Zaccour [47], or
monopolistic competition models such as Rouillon [48] are starting
points to assess firms’ competition in the space, where specific variables,
such as altitude, orbital inclination, number of satellites, size of satel­
lites, scheduled lifespan, etc., are key strategic decisions.
5. Pollution in outer space: orbital debris
As defined by NASA, “orbital debris is any human-made object in orbit
that no longer serves a useful purpose, including spacecraft fragments and
retired satellites”. Debris is a type of space pollution, with some charac­
teristics different to other types of pollution on Earth, that could have
dramatic consequences for commercial and other activities in outer
space [49]. Launching satellites and carrying out other operations in
orbit generate debris that can collide with operational satellites, with
fatal consequences in some cases. Even small debris with little mass can
have catastrophic consequences for the affected spacecraft due to high
velocities. On the other hand, space debris is self-propagating, as colli­
sions between pieces of debris create more debris. The so-called “Kessler
syndrome” represents a scenario of collisions in a cascade [50].
Debris is generated from different sources, including parts of launch
vehicles and rocket bodies, non-functional satellites, the breaking-up of
satellites and rocket bodies, and even tools lost by astronauts. Tradi­
tional launch systems have three or four stages, each with specific en­
gines. Initial stages usually burn in the re-entry to the atmosphere, but
the last stages can remain in space for long periods, especially for in­
sertions at high altitude orbit. The leading cause of in-orbit explosions is
related to residual fuel that remains in the tanks of rockets' upper stages
or derelict satellites abandoned in orbit. The extreme conditions in outer
space quickly cause mechanisms and devices to deteriorate, leading to
leaks mixing fuel components, which provoke accidental explosions that
break up rocket bodies and other spacecraft, and generate a large
number of fragments that travel around the initial orbit at hypervelocity (above 10,000 km per hour). Besides such accidental breakups, spacecraft interceptions by surface-launched missiles have
recently been a significant contributor. A single event, the intentional
destruction of the Chinese Feng-Yun 1C satellite by a missile in January
2007, increased the trackable space debris population by 30% [51].
Most debris (around 85%) are at a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) altitude
(below 2000 km), with peak concentration around an altitude of
700-900 km [52].
Seminal papers studying the economic consequences of orbit debris
are Adilov, Alexander and Cunningham [53,54] and Macauley [55],
followed by Rao, Burgess and Kaffine [56] and Rouillon [57]. Leaving
aside several differences, they have in common constructing stylized

6
The NYLS Journal of International and Comparative Law and the Michigan
Journal of Comparative Law.

6

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

physical models, formalizing the dynamics of the populations of orbiting
objects and studying the behavior of space industry players, assuming
that they neglect their contribution to the proliferation of debris. Adilov
et al. [53] developed a Salop-type model [58] for comparing the optimal
number of launches in a decentralized versus a centralized market.
Firms can enter the market by placing one satellite in orbit for the initial
time to sell satellite services for two periods unless their satellite is
destroyed by collision. They compare the number of launches in a
market equilibrium relative to the social optimum and find that the
number of satellites and launches is higher than the social optimum as
firms do not consider the negative externality of debris generated by
their activities in space. Given that the negative externality affects all
firms, there is under-investment in debris mitigation technologies.
Adilov et al. [54] construct an explicit physical model, formalizing the
interactions between satellites and debris fragments over an infinite
horizon. They characterize the equilibrium in perfect competition by
assuming that firms have adaptative expectations and launch satellites if
the expected marginal revenue is larger than expected marginal cost.
They determined that the threshold level of debris for economic viability
is lower than the level after which the “Kessler syndrome” occurs [50].
Kessler and Cour-Palais [50] called for the implementation of
different methods to reduce orbit debris, including improved engineer­
ing designs to reduce the frequency of satellite breakups from structural
failure and explosions in space and by reducing the number of
non-operational satellites. Macauley [55] presented different techno­
logical strategies to mitigate debris generation and/or collision risk,
including maneuvering capability, grave-yarding capability and
shielding, and argues that a launch tax system, combined with various
ex-ante and ex-post rebates, would incentivize investment in these
strategies. Adapting the methodology used in fisheries economics,
Rouillon [57] focuses on the long-run stationary state of the orbital
environment. He shows that, under given conditions, the curve repre­
senting the long-term fleet of active satellites as a function of the launch
rate has an inverted-U shape. The analysis confirms that firms launch too
many satellites under perfect competition.
The main lessons drawn from this initial literature are clear and not
surprising. Given its nature of common pool of resources and a market
with negative externalities in production, if output space is organized as
a perfectly competitive market, it will display the expected excess of
usage/quantity produces with respect to the social (Pareto) optimum.
Hence, the current legal framework that de-facto authorizes open access
to the Earth's orbit is rapidly leading the space industry to over-exploit
it. Putting this in perspective with the Kessler syndrome, we are in­
clined to worry about the risk of the space industry clogging up the
Earth's orbit to the point of triggering a chain reaction that will even­
tually render it unusable. However, Adilov et al. [54] and Bongers and
Torres [59] come to a reassuring conclusion by showing that there exists
a threshold level of debris for economic viability which is lower than the
“Kessler syndrome” level identified by Kessler and Cour-Palais [50].
The papers mentioned above draw some valid intuitions from theo­
retical models. However, this first step calls for a follow-up involving the
simulation of calibrated models to predict the evolution of the orbital
environment and inform decision-making. The first simulations were
provided by Klima et al. [60,61], Adilov et al. [62], Rao et al. [56], and
Bongers and Torres [59]. Adilov et al. [62] expand and calibrate their
model in Adilov et al. [54]. In their baseline simulation, the debris stock
increases at an increasing rate throughout the century, faster than
NASA's reference model projected. The authors argue that discrepancy is
mainly due to endogenizing the behavior of the space industry by taking
its incentives into account. Rao et al. [56] use an applied model cali­
brated on physical and economic data from 1957 to 2015 to simulate the
trajectories of open-access and optimal launches until 2040. Under open
access, they project a trajectory of satellite launches increasing from
around 50 satellites per year in 2020 to around 80 satellites per year in
2040. This rate is around twice as fast as the social optimum. The result
would be a further accumulation of debris in orbit over the period when

it would be socially optimal to reduce the debris stock drastically. These
results can also be used to show that the cost of inaction would be
considerable since the net present value of the satellite industry would
be around 600 billion dollars under open access, compared with around
3000 billion dollars under an optimal policy. Bongers and Torres [59]
calculate the equilibrium in a competitive market where firms launch
and operate satellites to maximize their discounted profits, taking the
risk of collision as exogenously given. They compare two scenarios,
depending on whether or not there is a risk of satellite destruction by
debris. In the steady state, they simulate that the risk of collision induces
firms to reduce the number of launches by 3.7 per cent and the number
of satellites in orbit by 4.5 per cent. Moreover, the fleet of satellites
remains far below the Kessler threshold, which they estimate is equal to
around 72,000 satellites for all low earth orbit. Nomura et al. [63] es­
timate the likelihood of reaching the Kessler syndrome and how the
tipping point can be delayed by removal and mitigation actions. Rao and
Rondina [64] also study the conditions for the Kessler syndrome and
estimate that the Earth's orbit could be unusable anytime between the
year 2040 and the year 2184, depending on the calibration of the model.
The model simulations are often broken down into several exogenous
scenarios for sensitivity analysis. Adilov et al. [62] diversify their sce­
narios, considering varying degrees of compliance with debris mitiga­
tion guidelines, a launch tax and various levels of debris removal effort.
For their part, Bongers and Torres [59] propose a sensitivity analysis to
take account of two technological developments currently underway,
namely lower launch costs and satellite miniaturization. Guyot and
Rouillon [65] investigate how changes in the design of satellites affect
debris dynamics, proposing a model in which, in addition to the rate of
launches, satellite operators make design choices concerning the dura­
bility of their satellites. Guyot and Rouillon [45] extend the previous
analysis and construct a model where satellite operators make choices
about the design and launch of satellites while in-orbit servicing firms
supply efforts to remove space debris. The incentive scheme that they
consider implementing consists in an optimal is a combination of an ad
valorem tax, a launch tax, and a market for removal effort certificates.
A growing body of literature has studied the role of environmental
policies in space. Space pollution can be controlled using policy in­
struments such as taxes or cap-and-control to mitigate emissions or by
ex-post interventions using active debris removal (ADR) policies. Klima
et al. [60] used a game theory approach whereby spacefaring agencies
can implement costly active debris removal interventions that benefit all
spacefaring agents or wait for other agents to carry out the work.
Grzelka and Wagner [66] developed a model containing property rights
and instruments to incentivize ex-ante increases in satellite quality and
collective or individual debris take-back interventions. Béal, Deschamps
and Moulin [67] compared the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium with a
tax on launches to finance debris mitigation with the welfare of optimal
traffic under a centralized tax. They found that, under a centralized tax,
the traffic is increased, and the debris mitigation cost is reduced
compared with the non-cooperative scenario. Rao et al. [56] developed
a model with infinity-lived satellites to study the implications of
Pigouvian taxation consisting of an international orbital-use fee. Adilov
et al. [62] simulated the quantity of orbital debris under different pol­
icies, including a launch tax, voluntary debris mitigation, and active
debris removal policies.
To avoid potential rebound effects, the managerial and technological
solutions described above should be complemented by economic in­
struments. Classically, the aim is to correct the externality by con­
fronting economic agents with the actual cost of their choice. Since
fragments cause that externality, a Pigouvian tax on debris emitted,
reflecting the associated discounted value of future damage, would
appear at first sight to be the most effective instrument [45]. However,
in practice and theory, implementing a Pigouvian tax could be chal­
lenging because the fragments generated after satellite destruction are
not detectable by radar below a size of 10 cm and can potentially be
responsible for cascading collisions. Furthermore, since a collision
7

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

involves two objects, liability is necessarily joint. Several second-best
economic instruments have been discussed in the literature. The most
common is the launch tax [45,53,55,67]. In simple settings, where firms
confine themselves to choosing the rate at which they launch satellites, a
launch tax proves to be effective because it allows them to internalize
the externality induced by the fragmentation of satellites.
As Rao et al. [56] noted, previous property is likely to fail in more
realistic models, in which firms make choices about satellite design and
mitigation actions. For example, a launch tax has no incentive to design
satellites with a longer operational lifetime and/or de-orbiting capa­
bility, even though the risk of collision depends also on satellite lifetime.
In fact, Rao et al. [56] argued that an orbital tax would do better than a
launch tax. Thus, under the constraint that it is not feasible to levy a
Pigouvian tax on the debris generated by a collision, implementing an
optimal outcome will require a combination of instruments to guide all
the choices influencing the risk of collision and the amount of debris
generated. Adilov et al. [43] suggest a system of interest-bearing deor­
biting performance bonds to incentivize firms to deorbit their expended
satellites.
Building on the Integrated Assessment Models (IAM) from the
environmental and climate change literature [68], integrated
macroeconomy-space models have been developed to analyze the im­
plications of orbital debris and optimal policy. Some initial attempts in
this direction were Rao and Letizia [69], Rao et al. [70], Nozawa et al.
[71], and Bongers et al. [72]. Rao and Letizia [69] combine an econo­
metric model of space activity with a debris environment model based
on a Particle-in-a-Box (PIB) model. Another example of IAM for orbital
debris is the OPUS (Orbital Debris Propagators Unified with Economic
Systems) model Rao et al. [70] developed. The model incorporates an
astrodynamic propagator to assess the state of objects in orbit combined
with a simple economic model to determine launch activity. The model
is used to evaluate policy proposals for managing orbital congestion.
Nozawa et al. [71] use a neoclassical growth model to study economic
activity and the damage produced by orbital pollution and estimate that
debris will cause harmful damage of approximately 1.95% of global GDP
in 200 years if no debris is remediated. Bongers et al. [73] develop a
partial-optimal growth model to assess the effectiveness of mitigation
policies.

data, including ex-post evaluation of public projects, political manipu­
lation, regional favoritism, and evaluation of country sanctions, even if
the available information was not initially designed for economic
analysis.
The first generation of studies used data from the Earth Observing
System (EOS) program by the U.S., which is a space-based environ­
mental data collection project. The data comes from the U.S. Defense
Meteorological Satellite Program Operational Linescan System (DMSPOLS), available publicly from 1973 and, more comprehensively, from
1992, when the digital archive was made public [78]. The original idea
was to use night-light data as a proxy for economic activity. An early
study by Elvidge et al. [79] used nighttime data from DMSP-OLS to es­
timate light emissions in 21 countries and examine their relationship
with population, economic activity, and electric power consumption.
They found that the area lit is highly correlated with population, gross
domestic product (GDP), and electric power consumption, even in
highly heterogeneous countries. Sutton and Costanza [80] estimated
that the correlation between light energy and GDP is 0.86 for U.S. states
and extended the analysis to estimate economic activity and
non-marketed activity globally at a one km2 resolution. Ebener et al.
[81] used nighttime light imagery to study income distribution per
capita at a regional sub-national level. Doll, Muller, and Morley [82]
utilized DMSP-OLS data to estimate GDP for 11 European Union coun­
tries and the United States with a resolution of 5 km2, finding that the
correlation of light radiance with GDP at a regional or state level is
above 0.9, except for France. Burchfield et al. [83] used satellite images
to study U.S. urban development and sprawling in metropolitan areas,
creating a grid of 8.7 billion 30 × 30 m cells for the U.S.
Following previous initial contributions, Henderson, Storeygard, and
Weild [84,85] developed a statistical framework for augmenting official
income growth statistics with satellite data. Henderson et al. [84]
identify two crucial drawbacks of using nighttime lights from space to
measure income: i) the relationship between economic activity and
lights is not constant across time and space, and ii) true light is imper­
fectly measured by satellites. Henderson et al. [84,85] measure GDP
growth for cities and subnational regions in Sub-Saharan Africa. To deal
with those issues, Galimberti [86] developed some statistical procedures
to extract new predictive information from the lights data for forecasting
GDP growth across a global sample of countries and found that i) night
lights data can be used to improve the accuracy of model-based forecasts
and ii) the relationship between lights and economic activity is very
different across countries.
From 2012 onward, more accurate nightlight data are available from
the Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership (NPP) satellite. This is the
so-called VIIRS-DNB data obtained from the Joint Polar-orbiting Satel­
lite System (JPSS), the Visible and Infrared Imaging Suite (VIIRS) Day
Night Band (DNB). Chen and Nordhaus [87] compare estimates from
using DMSP-OLS versus VIIRS-DNB data. They apply the two data sets to
both US states and metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and find that
both the DMSP-OLS and the VIIRS-DNB nighttime lights are more
helpful in predicting cross-sectional GDP than predicting time-series
GDP data and are better for prediction for MSA GDP than for state
GDP, which is interpreted as that lights are more closely related to urban
sectors than rural sectors.
Apart from measuring economic activity, another application of
those data is related to detecting measurement errors in national and
regional accounts. Nighttime light data has fueled the debate about the
reliability of GDP data for low- and medium-income countries. Sutton,
Elvidge, and Ghosh [88] use satellite data for the U.S., China, India, and
Turkey, showing that nighttime imaginary data is highly accurate in
estimating GDP. Chen and Nordhaus [89] compare luminosity data with
GDP at a country level, showing that both measures coincide for coun­
tries with high-quality statistical systems. The use of satellite nighttime
lights to assess the quality of economic statistics has also been dealt with
by Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin [90], who show that measurement er­
rors in DMSP-OLS nighttime light data are unrelated to the measurement

6. Satellites and economic data
Another field of economics related to outer space involves using data
collected by Earth observation satellites to measure economic activity,
economic growth, and other types of economic analysis, such as policy
evaluation. Earth observation satellites can measure various natural and
human-made phenomena on Earth, including economic activity [74,
75]. These satellites have sensors that detect artificial light, which can
be converted into data and used as a proxy for variables such as popu­
lation and economic activity geographical concentration. Croft [76] was
the first to demonstrate how nighttime light information from weather
observation satellites could be used to study population density, eco­
nomic activity, oilfield gas flaring, and agricultural fires.
Since Croft's seminal work, data from Earth observation satellites
have been widely used for empirical economic analysis. Donalson and
Storeygard [77] provide an excellent early review on advantages and
drawbacks of satellite data for economic applications, and a more recent
one can be found in Gibson, Olivia, and Boe-Gibson [78]. Donalson and
Storeygard (2013) highlight how spatial remote sensing data improve
upon traditional data in three key aspects: i) access to information that is
difficult to obtain by other means, ii) high spatial resolution, and iii)
broad geographic coverage. Satellite nighttime lights can be used for
producing-subnational economic statistics, even for small rural areas,
and for less-developed countries characterized by inaccurate and/or
lack of statistics. Another advantage is the frequency. Satellite nighttime
light data can be obtained daily more frequently than traditional sta­
tistics. Gibson et al. [78], instead, lists possible applications of nighttime
8

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

errors in national accounts or household surveys. Pinkovskiy and
Sala-i-Martin [91] use nighttime lights to compare Penn World Table
(PWT) and World Development Indicators (WDT) data in predicting
GDP, concluding that GDP series based on unadjusted domestic growth
rates are better than series based on purchasing power parity adjust­
ment. Using nighttime data, Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin [91] found
that Chinese growth in 2015 was higher than that reported by official
statistics. By contrast, Hu and Yao [92] estimate that the elasticity of
nighttime lights to GDP is about 1.3 (using DMSP-OLS data) and find
that the GDP growth of China and India has been overestimated in
official statistics based on an optimal combination of nighttime lights
and national accounts data.
Apart from previous studies, other dimensions remain to be explored.
Space data can improve availability of economic data along two critical
dimensions: frequency and spatial. Regarding the first, changes in eco­
nomic activity growth can be detected instantaneously thanks to
continuous remote sensing. Economic activity could be measured daily
and then used to increase the frequency of national accounts. Business
cycle analysis would also benefit from high frequency data. Any change
in the cycle can be detected just in time, thus making macroeconomic
forecasts, updating, and detection of turning points much more accurate.
On the other hand, production data can be available at any level of
aggregation, from cities to regions. This could be used to measure errors
in traditional statistics by comparing and checking data reliability for
other less-quality data, as shown by Chen and Nordhaus [89]. Finally,
another utility of satellite Earth's observation is the detection of the
informal economy [85,88]. The informal economy is not measured in
official statistics, and data collected by observation satellites can be used
to complement estimations of the underground economy. The applica­
tions in economics extend further. National, regional, and other low
spatial unit accounts and economic growth are not the only areas in
which space data will have a significant role. Environmental, energy,
and transportation economics are other fields in which space-generated
data can contribute significantly.
Existing data from Space are generated by Earth-observation satel­
lites that are not explicitly designed to collect data to be used in eco­
nomics. One step ahead could be the definition of data-collection
characteristics for economic purposes and even designing specific sat­
ellites for measuring economic activity and other economic purposes,
such as policy evaluation. This opens the door to the collaboration be­
tween economists and Space national agencies for the design, con­
struction, calibration, and launch of a specific satellite or the inclusion of
specific sensors in satellites for collecting economic data from the Earth
from Space. This would revolutionize the availability of economic data
through the possibility of generating high-frequency data on production
growth, activity reallocation, real-time measurement of the effects of
shocks and policies, and leading indicators of economic forecasting.
Such advances will significantly enhance data availability for empirical
economists, enabling the measurement of income distribution and eco­
nomic growth at any temporal frequency and spatial unit and improving
the reliability of measuring economic activity in another area with poor
statistics.

and doctrine among leading powers. Initially, military goals heavily
influenced space exploration, including the origins of launch systems
and the growing defense interest in space, given its vast potential for
military operations. Military communications, meteorological fore­
casting for operations, geographic positioning of combat units, control
and guidance of precision weapon systems, surveillance and intelligence
gathering are all indispensable for contemporary defense and warfare
strategies. These factors have led to an increased militarization of outer
space.
The militarization of outer space encompasses not only passive, nonweaponized military equipment, but also includes the development of
anti-satellite weapon systems (ASAT). Koplow [93] noted that the U.S.
began developing ASAT weapons just weeks after the Soviet Union
launched Sputnik I. Crucially, the traditional distinction between mili­
tarization and weaponization blurs in outer space, where any object
capable of maneuvering at high velocities can potentially be used as a
weapon [94]. The militarization of space could significantly hinder the
development of in-space industries and the implementation of policies to
reduce orbital pollution through active debris removal. While the mere
presence of more operational satellites contributing to the congestion of
near-Earth orbit might seem like a direct negative impact of militari­
zation, the strategic importance of these assets for national defense and
warfare makes them targets for adversaries, thus potentially trans­
forming space into a battlefield where civil spacecraft would also be
military targets.
From an economic perspective, the military use of outer space has
three main implications. First, militarization and weaponization of
space directly affect the population and dynamics of orbital debris.
Many launches and satellites are military, contributing to the density of
objects in orbit and debris production. Consequently, military activity in
space is a notable source of orbital debris. Additionally, for operational
reasons, many military satellites remain in orbit beyond their functional
lifespan, transforming into space junk and increasing the risk of colli­
sions with active satellites. Furthermore, a substantial number of orbital
debris has been intentionally created by testing direct-ascent (DA) antisatellite (ASAT) weapons. These tests typically involve destroying a
target satellite with a missile or the self-destruction of the weapon itself,
generating a significant amount of new orbital debris. A notable incident
was the intentional destruction of the Chinese Feng-Yun 1C satellite by a
missile in January 2007, which increased the population of trackable
space debris (pieces larger than 10 cm) by 30%, resulting in 3449
catalogued fragments [51]. Up to 2010, ASAT tests accounted for about
41% of orbital debris [95], and this percentage is much higher if the
DA-ASAT test conducted by China in 2007 and the most recent test by
Russia in 2021 are included. Second, the development of debris removal
vehicles is controversial due to their dual-use potential; they can also
function as anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons, posing an obstacle to the
implementation of active mitigation policies aimed at reducing orbital
pollution [96]. Indeed, any technology designed for active debris
removal could be repurposed as a weapon since it can remove any object
from orbit, including adversary satellites. Third, the emerging in-orbit
services industry is similarly threatened by military considerations.
Space services such as refueling, upgrading, maintenance, and repairs of
satellites could be compromised. These activities require space vehicles
that could also be utilized as ASAT weapons given their capabilities. The
unique conditions of space mean that practically any spacecraft has the
potential to be used as an ASAT weapon.
[97] explored the issue of orbital debris from a behavioral economics
perspective, examining its impact on national defense. They argued that
orbital debris poses a significant threat to the security interests of
spacefaring nations. Bernat [98] highlighted the growing strategic
importance of satellites and other orbital systems, noting that this has
led major spacefaring countries to develop advanced space weapon
systems and specialized units for space warfare. Bongers and Torres [99]
analyzed the implications of ASAT tests and space warfare on orbital
debris. They employed a straightforward physical-economic model to

7. Space defense
Military and civilian satellites provide strategic advantages for se­
curity, national defense, and warfare, making military considerations a
pivotal aspect of human activities in outer space. The militarization of
space began with the advent of space exploration, primarily through the
adaptation of ballistic missiles to deploy spacecraft into orbit. The mil­
itary use of outer space follows naturally from the unique technological
benefits that satellites offer in terms of warfare and security. The
deployment of space capabilities for defense enhances the military ca­
pacity of spacefaring nations and supports arms control treaties by
improving verification and monitoring. Moreover, military applications
in space are crucial for modern warfare, influencing technology, tactics
9

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

A. Bongers et al.

satellite constellations with thousands of satellites providing internet
access services anywhere in the world.
Table 2 provides a concise overview of current activities in outer
space, including their revenues and key challenges. The World Economic
Forum and McKinsey (2024) project that the global space economy will
reach $1.8 trillion by 2035. The largest current market segment is
navigation/GPS, with an estimated market size of about $300 billion in
2024, expected to grow to $700 billion by 2032 [102]. The second
largest segment by revenue is telecommunications, projected to increase
from $110 billion in 2025 to approximately $260 billion by 2034 [103].
Global military space spending reached $60 billion in 2024 [104].
Existing industries face several challenges beyond environmental
concerns. Regulatory and legal issues, such as licensing, orbital slots,
spectrum allocation, safety regulations, and insurance, affect all com­
mercial space activities. In addition, certain commercial services such as
navigation, positioning, and telecommunications have potential dualuse military applications, meaning their development is closely influ­
enced by national space defense policies.

demonstrate how anti-satellite military tests, especially those using
direct-ascent weapons, substantially increase the likelihood of triggering
the Kessler syndrome. While the long-term impact of low-altitude
anti-satellite tests is mitigated by atmospheric drag, high-altitude
direct-ascent anti-satellite tests pose a persistent threat to human ac­
tivities in space. Their paper also simulates the long-term effects of a
hypothetical space war, assuming the destruction of 250 satellites by the
US and China. Such a conflict would have severe consequences. The
interruption of high-value satellite services would disrupt everyday life,
severely impairing military operational capacities. Without long-term
communication, reconnaissance, GPS for drones and guided bombs,
and even weather information, the effectiveness of modern forces would
be drastically reduced.
Finally, it is worth noting that the potential for conflict extends into
outer space, which could become a future battlefield. In such a scenario,
critical for enemy military operations, military satellites would become
prime targets. Similarly, one's military satellites would also be at risk. A
conflict between spacefaring nations would generate a substantial
number of debris, posing an additional threat to any remaining opera­
tional satellites of any country.

8.2. In-orbit industry services

8. The economy of outer space

Since the beginning of the XXI century, new constellations of satel­
lites are expanding the outer-space industry in many directions, from
enhancing R&D activities and communication services, for instance,
allowing access to the internet from any location on Earth, to creating
new economic applications like in-orbit manufacturing with micro
gravity, energy production and asteroids mining, and developing new
in-orbit services not only for consumers on Earth but also for spacebased consumers like satellites maintenance and up-grading, space
tourism, agriculture.
We define in-orbit manufacturing as the industry to be developed in
outer space to produce goods supplied to consumers in outer space. The
most advanced program laying the principles of this industry is the inspace manufacturing (ISM) project at NASA [3]. Another industrial
branch will be the spacecraft manufacturing sector, and the primary
industry in space will be the construction of spacecraft. Initial devel­
opment of this industry will need material from the Earth, but it could be
the case to be transformed into an autonomous input from the Earth
industry. Launches from the Earth will change from spacecraft manu­
factured on the Earth to materials needed to manufacture spacecraft in
space. In the future, this means that the space industry based on the
Earth will translate to space, eliminating the need to launch spacecraft
from the Earth. Repairs, upgrading hardware, and maintenance services

Nowadays, the space economy is almost entirely based on commer­
cial satellites, individual or constellations of satellites, providing ser­
vices related to communications, broadcasting, remote sensing, geopositioning, and weather observation; plus, the spending generated by
the defense sector for military satellites and spacecraft. All these com­
mercial and defense activities will be expanded in the near future with
the consolidation and the dawn of emerging industries with great po­
tential growth. We shall analyze them in turn.
8.1. Existing industries
Nowadays, a total of more than 11,000 satellites is operative and
producing a variety of critical services for transport and logistics,
financial markets, agriculture, etc., with a market size of $630 billion in
2023 [100]. These industries not only generate significant economic
value on their own but also create technological spillovers that foster
innovation in other sectors. Furthermore, scientific activities in space
have yielded breakthroughs in material science, biology, and medicine,
with applications ranging from drug development to advanced
manufacturing. This market has changed recently with the advent of
Table 2
Existing space industry. Revenues, services, and challenges.
Sector

Current
Revenues

Core Business

Examples

Key challenges

Telecommunications
(GEO/LEO)

$110
billion

Global connectivity,
broadband, IoT

Starlink, OneWeb, SES, HughesNet

Defense & Security

$60 billion

Surveillance, space-based ISR,
ASAT arms [94]

military GPS, spy satellites, ASAT systems

Research & Earth
Observation

$6 billion

ISS, space long-range telescopes,
biomedical experiments, weather forecast

Navigation & GPS

$300
billion
$1.2 billion

Science, medicine, climate
monitoring, remote-sensing
data sales [101]
Precision positioning for civil/
military
Suborbital and orbital
passenger flights [5]
Crop optimization, disaster
warning [78]

Regulatory/legal: spectrum allocation and licensing.
Political: national security and data-sovereignty.
Technical: bandwidth limits and latency, payload
miniaturization.
Regulatory/legal: share information on military
systems among nations.
Environmental: debris emissions.
Military: Weaponization of space.
Regulatory/legal: funding, data sharing agreements

Space Tourism
Agriculture &
Environment
monitoring

$20 billion

GPS, Galileo, GLONASS, BeiDou
Blue Origin, SpaceX, Virgin Galactic
Satellites for Earth observation
(Copernicus, Landsat), Suomi National
Polar-orbiting Partnership (VIIRS-DNB)

10

Regulatory/legal: spectrum allocation, security.
Military: dual-use technology
Regulatory/legal: safety, insurance and regulation of
licenses.
Regulatory/legal: privacy and policy (data licensing,
confidentiality).
Institutional: building capacity at statistical
agencies. (Integrating novel EO data into GDP/
agriculture stats poses methodological challenges).

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

will also change the industry in the next few years, affecting the design
and lifespan of satellites. Indeed, refueling is an essential service with
important implications not only for the lifespan of satellites but also due
to its role as a passive debris mitigation activity. Refueling activities will
eliminate the problem of derelict satellites abandoned in orbit, reducing
the negative externalities produced by debris and congestion of precious
orbit slots.
Guyot and Rouillon [45] consider a model with in-orbit servicing
firms that supply efforts to remove orbital debris. They focus on the
stationary state of the orbital environment, reducing themselves to a
static game. Oligopolistic firms make choices about the design and
launch of their satellites and their debris removal effort. The satellite
industry may be interested in cleaning up the orbital environment in this
framework. However, the size of the operating satellite fleet and the loss
of social surplus increases with the number of actors in the market.

Blue Origin, Virgin Galactic, Space Adventures, Axiom Spaces, and
SpaceX. Zhang and Wang [115] provide a revision of a growing space
tourism literature which has studied aspects such as motivation and
preferences, potential demand estimation, prices and revenues evolu­
tion, types of space tourism, etc. Common wisdom is that space tourism
is in its infancy, as the commercial passenger flight industry was one
Century ago. Finally, space burial is another service consisting of small
capsules burning up in the re-entry to the atmosphere, suborbital, on the
moon, or sent further into space. Commercial activity of space burials
started in 1997 by the US company Celestis. However, the first space
burial was done by NASA in 1992, containing the remains of the creator
of Start Trek. Space burials are restricted to the remains of humans and
pets. NASA conducted the first burial in deep space in 2006, with the
remains of the American astronomer Clyde Tombaugh.
8.4. In-orbit industry future challenges

8.3. Other industries: natural resources, energy, and tourism

Table 3 outlines three emerging in-orbit industries currently under
development: space-based solar power (SBSP), lunar and asteroid min­
ing, and in-orbit manufacturing and services. Although still at an early
stage, private investment in these sectors is already significant, esti­
mated at $1-3 billion in the energy sector (SBSP), a similar amount in
space mining, and $2.2-3 billion in in-orbit manufacturing and services.
Despite several remaining technical uncertainties, SBSP could reach
a market size of about $15 billion by 2035 [116]. Expectations are even
more ambitious for space mining, with projected market sizes poten­
tially reaching trillions of dollars. Targeted materials include
platinum-group metals (platinum, rhodium, iridium, etc.), which are
extremely valuable on Earth; nickel-iron metals, which could be used for
in-space construction; and volatiles (water, hydrogen, oxygen), which
could serve as propellants and life-support resources for space opera­
tions. Market potential remains highly uncertain. As an illustration,
Asteroid 16 Psyche (about 226 km across) is estimated to contain metals
worth $10–30 trillion at current prices. Finally, the in-orbit
manufacturing and services industry is forecast to reach an average
market size of $50 billion by 2040, according to several market-research
firms.
These emerging industries face challenges similar to those of existing
space industries, but also additional technical and regulatory hurdles
that must be overcome before they can become profitable. Space mining
raises particularly complex regulatory and legal issues, especially con­
cerning property rights over lunar or asteroid resources, as well as
environmental concerns related to the risk of contaminating outer space.
Even more challenging is in-orbit manufacturing and services, which
directly intersects with military space activities because many of its
technologies are dual-use. This issue will be discussed further in the next
section.

Apart from the in-orbit industry, we can identify a few areas that will
change the current configuration of services produced by satellites to
Earth customers. These areas are natural resources, energy, and tourism.
Natural resources economics is another branch to be extended to space.
Indeed, extracting natural resources is one of the most promising ave­
nues for economic activity in outer space. Asteroid mining is expected to
develop and has significant economic implications for these markets on
Earth [4,105–107]. Space mining will increase the supply of critical
metals on the Earth, which are limited. Weitzman [108] estimates that
the world loss in consumption from the finiteness of Earth's resources is
about 1 per cent compared to a trajectory with infinite mineral results.
Several already established private companies (most of them based
in Luxemburg) are investing in asteroid mining technologies, which will
transform the supply of natural material, eliminating depletion of this
non-renewable material in the Earth, removing the restriction imposed
by the Hotelling non-renewable price equation (Hotelling, 1937). This
would require the development of new models, introducing two crucial
elements: cost of exploration, which presumably will be high in this
mining industry, and the existence of an environment where resources
are non-exhaustible, where investing in exploration will increase the
reserves of resources, contrary to standard models of natural resources
restricted to the Earth [109]. Several other questions emerge as to the
property rights of the mine or asteroid.
Some studies have been done on this area. Sommariva et al. [107]
estimate the net present value of moon mining and how it is affected by
the private-public partnership. Dahl et al. [110] use a model of firm
entry to study the consequences of asteroid mining on the terrestrial
mineral market. Fleming et al. [111] study how space mining could
contribute to economic growth. For that, they extend the neoclassical
growth model with space mining, breaking down the limitations of
mineral resources on the Earth. They find that space mining could lead
to the continued growth of metal used on Earth while limiting envi­
ronmental costs.
Asteroid minerals are not the only natural resource that can be
extracted in space. The supply of energy produced in space to the Earth
is another issue. Indeed, energy generation from the Sun is another
promising sector currency under evaluation to be developed in space.
This is the so-called space-based solar power (SBSP) energy system,
consisting of spacecraft that collect solar energy, convert it into electric
power, and transmit it to a final consumer [112]. Macauley and Davis
[112] estimated the economic implications of space solar power as a
source of electricity for space-based activities. In contrast, Wood and
Gilbert [101] focus on the implications of supplying energy from SBSP to
the Earth.
Other industries, such as space tourism, have a potential yet to be
calibrated [5,113,114]. Space tourism implies using space and space­
craft for leisure and recreational purposes. Several private companies
offer these services, including orbital and suborbital space travel, such as

9. Discussion: policy challenges
Since the beginning of the XXI century, a new era for space missions
is rising, called New Space, in which (i) US private companies took over
the NASA in launching rockets and placing satellites in orbit, (ii) com­
mercial services are provided not only by individual satellites, but also
by large satellite constellations designed to provide global cover, and
(iii) more countries like China and Europe stepped up as reliable players
in the space race. Weinzierl [1] effectively illustrated the paradigm shift
of the New Space and laid down the main aspects of an analytical eco­
nomics framework for understanding and managing the development of
the space economy. He elaborates further by listing three main com­
ponents that such a framework should possess: “1) establishing the market
through decentralization of decision making […], 2) refining the market
through policies that address market failures […], 3) tempering the market
through regulation in pursuit of social objectives,” With current regulation
these operators have incentives to keep non-operational satellites in
orbit as a barrier to entry for other operators, increasing prices and
11

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

Table 3
In-orbit industry. Current investment, business, and challenges.
Sector

Current
Investment

Expected
market size

Core Business

Examples

Key challenges

Energy (SBSP)

$1-3 billion

$15 billion in
2035

Space-based solar power
[101,112]

Production of in-orbit solar energy

Mineral & Asteroid
Mining

$1-3 billion

Measured in
trillion
dollars

Water, metals, and gas
extraction, off-Earth
resources [4,111]

Moon and asteroids mining

In-orbit
Manufacturing &
Services

$2.3-3
billion

$50 billion by
2040

Microgravity materials,
satellite servicing
[Patel, 2019; [3]

Refueling, repair, and upgrading of
satellites. Production of optic
fibers, pharmaceutical experiments

Regulatory/legal: spectrum and orbital-use
permissions (power beaming laws undeveloped),
space debris policy.
Technical: Very high costs; large-scale wireless power
transmission (microwave/laser) and on-orbit
assembly.
Environmental: orbital debris from large structures,
ground safety.
Regulatory/legal: unsettled Outer Space Treaty vs
Moon Treaty (resource ownership unclear). E.g. US
law (2015) grants private rights to extracted
resources, but some nations (Russia/China) argue
OST prohibits it.
Technical: extreme cost of reaching, mining,
processing in microgravity, and transportation.
Environmental: risk of creating new debris or
contaminating space.
Regulatory/legal: liability and control of a serviced
satellite.
Technical: complex robotics and precise docking/
refueling in microgravity.
Military: dual-use technology.

reducing output and social welfare.
In this novel context, the interest of economics literature gradually
shifted from satellites congestion and optimal orbits and spectrum as­
signments to more practical matters like mitigating the problem of space
debris in absence of coordination, thus bringing debris pollution to the
front seat of policy analyses about outer space, and the effects of mili­
tarization and weaponization of space over the development of the inorbit industry where given the strategic value of space, space defense
policy should be designed taking into account their profound implica­
tions on commercial and scientific activities in space. In what follows,
we analyze the main policy challenges regarding these two critical areas.

services sector, they will also encourage the launch of additional satel­
lites. Moreover, this rebound effect is likely to be rapid and robust, given
that the space industry has entered the New Space era, characterized by
a high capacity for responsiveness and innovation [1,118].
ADR policies imply the use of technologies to remove debris frag­
ments and intact objects from orbit. This is an ex-post mitigation policy
equivalent to a negative emission. ADR mitigation proposals are limited
to the study of the development of alternative technologies for debris
removal. Due to several factors, practical implementation of ADR pol­
icies is complex. First, no individual agent (nations or private firms) has
incentives to pursue this policy as there are no property rights in space
(except spacecraft ownership). Second, any ADR technology is of dual
use: it can be used to eliminate orbital debris but also used against
enemy spacecraft as a space weapon. However, these technologies are
expensive and need help for practical implementation as no scheme for
distributing the cost among operators is available. Finally, there is the
dual-use nature of debris removal technologies, which can be considered
anti-satellite weapon systems. ADR technologies have, by definition, a
dual-use nature. Robotic arms, nets, harpoons, and other capture
mechanisms designed to remove debris can also be repurposed for
disabling or capturing operational satellites. This creates a security
dilemma for main spacefaring states: while ADR policies enhance orbital
safety, the existence of any ADR spacecraft can be perceived as a po­
tential threat to both military and civil satellites [96].
However, no active coordinated policy has been implemented to
reduce the generation of new debris or to remove existing debris from
orbit. Weeden [119] and Mark and Kamath [120] survey active
debris-removal methods currently in development (e.g., laser, ion beam,
tether, sail, satellite, foam) to clean up polluted orbital regions. Mark
and Kamath [120] note that these technologies are, at best, still in the
experimental stage and will require a substantial research effort before
they reach maturity. Moreover, even when operational, current inter­
national treaties applicable to space will likely hinder the emergence of
a market for orbital debris removal [119,121]. On the one hand, objects
in orbit come under the jurisdiction of the launching countries. Sec­
ondly, any damage caused during a mission in orbit is the responsibility
of the country of origin in the event of a fault.

9.1. Orbital debris mitigation policies
Managerial and technological solutions to assess the problem caused
by debris in orbit can be classified into three categories: emissions
mitigation, adaptation, and active debris removal (ADR) policies.
Emissions mitigation refers to actions aimed at reducing the creation of
debris, such as limiting accidental break-ups, improving the ability to
spot debris and maneuver satellites during operational lifetime, and deorbiting end-of-life satellites. Adaptation involves designing more robust
satellites to reduce damage risk and debris generation in collisions with
the use of shields. Bongers et al. [73] study the evolution of the debris
population when firms can endogenously choose the extent of satellite
shielding. In general, ADR policies represent an ex-post intervention and
imply cleaning the space by using some technology to reduce the
number of orbital debris.
The Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC) and
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of the United Nations
have established a set of space debris mitigation guidelines to be fol­
lowed by the governmental space agencies in the design of spacecraft
and launch systems to reduce or eliminate the generation of debris.
Importantly, these recommendations are non-binding, and current
compliance rates must be increased to prevent further growth in the
space debris population ([117], annual report). Rao et al. [56] warn
against the risk of relying exclusively on managerial and technological
solutions. Even if the mitigation guidelines were thoroughly followed
and a dynamic debris removal market was organized, it should be borne
in mind that these solutions treat the symptoms but not the cause of the
problem. Admittedly, they will slow down the accumulation of debris
and delay the moment when the risk of collision will warn the space
industry. However, by increasing the profitability of the satellite

9.2. Militarization and in-orbit services
The development of an in-orbit services industry also faces similar
problems to ADR policies. The in-orbit services (IOS) industry,
12

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

encompassing satellite maintenance, upgrades, repair, refueling, deor­
biting, is emerging as a critical component of the commercial space
economy. These services have the potential to extend satellite lifespans,
reduce replacement costs, enhance operational resilience, and improve
the sustainability of orbital operations. The militarization of space,
while enhancing national security, presents significant obstacles to the
in-orbit services industry. Dual-use ambiguities, restricted access to
strategic orbital zones, legal and liability constraints, and operational
challenges all impede satellite servicing, repair, refueling, and debris
mitigation.
The IOS industry is projected to become a multibillion-dollar sector
over the next decade. It includes activities such as satellite refueling
which would extend the operational life of satellites; repair and up­
grades, servicing satellites to replace components or upgrading tech­
nology, and reducing the need for costly satellite replacements; and
orbital assembly of satellite constellations and large infrastructure for
telecommunications or Earth observation.
These services rely on precision rendezvous, autonomous robotic
manipulation, and proximity operations, all of which require access to
orbital paths near client satellites. The militarization of space creates
several specific obstacles for the IOS industry. First, dual-Use Technol­
ogy Concerns. Many IOS technologies, robotic arms, grappling mecha­
nisms, refueling interfaces, and proximity operations, are inherently
dual use. While they are intended for servicing satellites, militarized
states may perceive these capabilities as tools for espionage, sabotage, or
offensive actions against military satellites. Second, strategic risk
perception: Militarized states may restrict commercial servicing mis­
sions near military or dual-use satellites, fearing that a servicing
spacecraft could interfere with or manipulate sensitive assets. For
example, the U.S. National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) maintains
classified satellite constellations whose positions and maneuvers are
sensitive information. Commercial servicing missions cannot operate
near these assets without extensive coordination, limiting available
operational space. Third, access denial: Companies may be barred from
servicing satellites in certain orbital zones, limiting potential markets
and increasing operational complexity. All these factors generate regu­
latory and operational uncertainty for IOS firms, which may delay in­
vestment and deployment.
To mitigate the impact of militarization on the in-orbit servicing
(IOS) industry, several policy measures are recommended. First,
confidence-building measures: implementing advance notification pro­
tocols and international verification mechanisms can help reduce
mistrust around the servicing of spacecraft near militarized satellites.
Second, dual-use clarification: establishing international norms that
distinguish IOS technologies from offensive capabilities would help
diminish perceived threats. Third, protected service corridors could be
formally designated for commercial IOS activities, enabling safe prox­
imity operations without compromising military security. Finally,
government-commercial collaboration can integrate security re­
quirements into IOS operations, allowing for the safe servicing of sat­
ellites while maintaining national defense objectives. These measures
would support the commercial potential of the IOS industry while
respecting military concerns, fostering its responsible and sustainable
growth.

contributions to this new field. Outer space as an international common
alerts us to potential market failures and the need for regulation. Given
the increasing value of outer space, more economic studies are expected
to emerge in this new and largely unexplored area.
The development of space economics will require adapting existing
economic models to the unique physical characteristics of space and its
new resource and technological constraints. It may necessitate the
development of new theoretical frameworks to address emerging eco­
nomic issues as human presence in space increases. An open question is
which standard economic analysis tools can be applied to space eco­
nomics. In principle, space economics will share several issues with wellestablished economic fields, and hence, tools from these fields could be
applied to similar issues observed on Earth. However, the physical
characteristics of space will play a role, and new types of theoretical
models combining economic and physical variables of space will be
necessary.
More branches of space economics, connected to several economic
branches, such as natural resources, environmental economics, trans­
portation, energy, new product industries, R&D, tourism, and defense,
are expected to develop. Three important areas are likely to attract more
attention from economists. The first concerns the regulatory framework.
Commercial activities in outer space will require an international reg­
ulatory framework to assign property rights at different altitudes. The
second main research area will be space environment [2]. In a short
period, the space environment has become highly polluted with space
debris. Investigating optimal environmental policies for space and the
most appropriate abatement instruments will require the development
of space-economy integrated assessment models in the tradition of the
DICE model by Nordhaus [68]. Finally, military considerations will be a
critical challenge for both cleaning space from debris and the develop­
ment of the in-orbit industry, as in both cases necessary technologies are
dual-use. Without careful coordination and international norms, mili­
tarization could slow the growth of a sector vital to orbital sustainability
and
the
economic
viability
of
satellite
constellations.
Confidence-building measures, dual-use clarifications, and protected
orbital corridors are essential to reconcile the objectives of military se­
curity with the commercial expansion of the IOS industry. Ultimately,
the long-term success of in-orbit services depends on balancing strategic
concerns with technological and commercial imperatives.

10. Concluding remarks

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Apart from previous studies, other dimensions of the economics of
outer space remain to be explored. Humankind is just beginning to
explore outer space, but significant progress has been made over the past
sixty years. The space economy is in its infancy, but several economic
issues are emerging alongside its growth due to expanding human ac­
tivities in space. These issues demand attention from the economic
profession. Although space economics is a nascent field, there have been
several recent contributions to investigate the economic consequence of
human activity in space. This review covers most of the initial

Anelí Bongers: Data curation, Investigation, Supervision, Writing –
original draft. Benedetto Molinari: Formal analysis, Funding acquisi­
tion, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision,
Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Sébastien Rouillon: Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing. José L. Torres: Conceptualization, Data
curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Project administration, Re­
sources, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft.

Authors’ declaration
All authors listed in this submission declare hereby that.
• the work described has not been published previously except in the
form of a preprint, an abstract, a published lecture, academic thesis
or registered report.
• the article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.
• the article's publication is approved by all authors and tacitly or
explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was carried
out.
• if accepted, the article will not be published elsewhere in the same
form, in English or in any other language, including electronically,
without the written consent of the copyright-holder.

13

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

Declaration of competing interest

[32] W. Pritchard, Economics of satellite communications systems, Acta Astronaut. 8
(11–12) (1981) 1321–1341.
[33] G.C. Wihlborg, P.M. Wijkman, Outer space resources in efficient and equitable
use: new frontiers for old principles, J. Law Econ. 24 (1) (1981) article 3.
[34] H.J. Levin, Spectrum negotiations and the geostationary satellites, N. Y. Law Sch.
J. Int. Comp. Law 4 (1) (1982) 77–81.
[35] M.K. Macauley, Out of space? Regulation and technical change in
communications satellites, Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (2) (1986) 280–284.
[36] H.J. Levin, Emergent markets for orbit spectrum assignments – an idea whose
time has come, Telecommun. Policy 12 (1) (1988) 57–76.
[37] H.J. Levin, Trading orbit spectrum assignments in the space satellite industry,
Am. Econ. Rev. 81 (2) (1991) 42–45.
[38] J.C. Thompson, Space for rent: the international telecommunications union, space
law, and orbit/spectrum leasing space law, and orbit/spectrum leasing, J. Air Law
Commer. 62 (1) (1996). Article 10.
[39] M.K. Macauley, Allocation of orbit and spectrum resources for regional
communications: what's at stake? J. Law Econ. 41 (S2) (1998) 737–764.
[40] H. Shibusawa, An economic analysis of outer space: optimal location of
telecommunications satellites, Stud. Reg. Sci. 30 (3) (1999) 71–83.
[41] M.K. Macauley, Economics of space, in: E. Sadeh (Ed.), Space Politics and Policy.
an Evolutionary Perspective, 2004, pp. 181–200.
[42] N. Adilov, B.M. Cunningham, P.J. Alexander, J. Duvall, D.R. Shiman, Left for
dead: anti-competitive behavior in orbital space, Econ. Inq. 57 (3) (2019)
1497–1509.
[43] N. Adilov, V. Braun, P. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, The economics of satellites
deorbiting performance bonds, Econ. Lett. 228 (2023) 111150.
[44] I. Brownhall, D. Kaffine, M. Lifson, S. Bhattarai, E. Stevenson, S. Lemmens,
F. Letizia, Understanding the Effect of Fiscal Interventions on the Future Space
Debris Environment, 2025. Manuscript.
[45] J. Guyot, S. Rouillon, Sustainable management of space activity in low Earth
orbit, Journal of Environmental Economics and Policy 13 (2) (2023) 188–212.
[46] J. Guyot, A. Rao, S. Rouillon, Oligopoly competition between satellite
constellations will reduce economic welfare from orbit use, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 120 (43) (2023) e2221343120.
[47] P. Bernhard, M. Deschamps, G. Zaccour, Large satellite constellations and space
debris: exploratory analysis of strategic management of the space commons, Eur.
J. Oper. Res. 304 (2023) 1140–1157.
[48] S. Rouillon, Monopolistic competition in a limited orbital space, Environ. Resour.
Econ. 88 (4) (2025) 1009–1038.
[49] J.C. Liou, N.L. Johnson, Risks in space from orbiting debris, Science 311 (2006)
340–341.
[50] D.J. Kessler, B.G. Cour-Palais, Collision frequency of artificial satellites: the
creation of a debris belt, J. Geophys. Res. 83 (A6) (1978) 2637–2646.
[51] OECD, Measuring the economic impact of the space sector. Key indicators and
options to improve data, in: Background Paper for the G20 Space Economy
Leaders' Meeting. Saudi Arabia, October 2020, 2020.
[52] NASA, Orbital Debris Quarterly News 27 (4) (2023). October.
[53] N. Adilov, P.J. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, An economic analysis of earth orbit
pollution, Environ. Resour. Econ. 60 (2015) 81–98.
[54] N. Adilov, P.J. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, An economic "Kessler Syndrome": a
dynamic model of earth orbit debris, Econ. Lett. 166 (2018) 79–82.
[55] M.K. Macauley, The economics of space debris: estimating the costs and benefits
of debris mitigation, Acta Astronaut. 115 (2015) 160–164.
[56] A. Rao, M.G. Burgess, D. Kaffine, Orbital-use fees could more than quadruple the
value of the space industry, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 (23) (2020)
12756–12762.
[57] S. Rouillon, A phyco-economic model of low Earth orbit management, Environ.
Resour. Econ. 77 (2020) 695–723.
[58] S.C. Salop, Monopolistic competition with outside goods, Bell J. Econ. 10 (1)
(1979) 141–156.
[59] A. Bongers, J.L. Torres, Orbital debris and the market of satellites, Ecol. Econ. 209
(2023) 107831.
[60] R. Klima, D. Bloembergen, R. Savani, K. Tuyls, D. Hennes, D. Izzo, Space debris
removal: a game theoretic analysis, Games 7 (3) (2016) 20.
[61] R. Klima, A. Bloembergen, R. Savani, A. Tuyls, A. Sapera, D. Izzo, Space debris
removal: learning to cooperate and the price of anarchy, Frontiers in Robotic and
IA 5 (2018) article 54.
[62] N. Adilov, P.J. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, The economics of orbital debris
generation, accumulation, mitigation, and remediation, Journal of Space Safety
Engineering 7 (3) (2020) 447–450.
[63] K. Nomura, S. Rella, H. Merrit, M. Baltussen, D. Bird, A. Tjuka, D. Falk, Tipping
points of space debris in low Earth orbit, Int. J. Commons 18 (1) (2024) 17–31.
[64] A. Rao, G. Rondina, The Economics of Orbit Use: Open Access, External Costs, and
Runaway Debris Growth, Association of Environmental and Resource Economists,
Forthcoming, 2024.
[65] J. Guyot, S. Rouillon, Designing Satellites to Cope with Orbital Debris, 2021.
Bordeaux Economics Working Paper, 2021-16.
[66] Z. Grzelka, J. Wagner, Managing satellite debris in low-earth orbit: incentivizing
ex ante satellite quality and ex post take-back programs, Environ. Resour. Econ.
74 (1) (2019) 319–336.
[67] S. Béal, M. Deschamps, H. Moulin, Taxing congestion of the space commons, Acta
Astronaut. 177 (2020) 313–319.
[68] W. Nordhaus, A Question of Balance. Weighing the Options on Global Warming
Policies, Yale University Press, 2008.
[69] A. Rao, F. Letizia, An Integrated Debris Environment Assessment Model, 2022
05205 arXiv preprint 2205.

The authors declare no financial interests/personal relationships
which may be considered as potential competing interests. Bongers,
Molinari and Torres report financial support was provided by Spain
Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities with funding grant
PID2023-152748OB-I00. Other authors declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] M. Weinzierl, Space, the final economic frontier, J. Econ. Perspect. 32 (2018)
173–192.
[2] N. Adilov, P.J. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, Understanding the economics of
orbital pollution through the lens of terrestrial climate change, Space Policy 59
(2022) 101471.
[3] T. Prater, N. Werkheiser, F. Ledbetter, Toward a multimaterial fabrication
laboratory. In space manufacturing as an enabling technology for long-endurance
human space flight, J. Br. Interplanet. Soc. (JBIS) 71 (2018) 27–35.
[4] S.D. Ross, Near-earth asteroid mining, Caltech Space Industry Report (2001).
[5] W. Peeters, From suborbital space tourism to commercial personal spaceflight,
Acta Astronaut. 66 (11–12) (2010) 1625–1632.
[6] G.K. O'Neill, The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space, Space Studies Institute
Press, 1977.
[7] T. Sandler, W. Shulze, The economics of outer space, Nat. Resour. J. 21 (1981)
371–393.
[8] P. Krugman, The theory of interstellar trade, Econ. Inq. 48 (2010) 1119–1123.
[9] NASA, Orbital Debris Quarterly News 11 (2) (2007). April.
[10] NASA, Monthly number of objects in Earth orbit by object type, Orbital Debris
Quarterly News 29 (1) (2025) 8.
[11] ESA, Space debris by the number. https://www.esa.int/Space_Safety/Space_De
bris/Space_debris_by_the_numbers, 2025.
[12] K. Whealan-George, The economic impacts of the commercial space industry,
Space Policy 47 (2019) 181–186.
[13] Bureau of Economic Analysis, New and Revised Statistics for the U.S. Space
Economy, 2012-2021, 2023. (Accessed 27 June 2023).
[14] Space Foundation, The Space Report Q2, The Space Foundation, 2023.
[15] Satellite Industry Association, State of the satellite industry report 2024, Satellite
Industry Association (2024).
[16] L. Corrado, S. Grassi, A. Paolillo, E. Silgado-Gómez, The macroeconomic
spillovers from space activity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 120 (43) (2023)
e2221342120.
[17] N. Adilov, V. Braun, P. Alexander, B.M. Cunningham, An estimate of expected
economic losses from satellite collisions with orbital debris, Journal of Space
Safety Engineering 10 (1) (2023) 66–69.
[18] N. Adilov, P.J. Alexander, V. Braun, B.M. Cunningham, An Economic Indicator of
the Orbital Debris Environment, Journal of Space Safety Engineering,
forthcoming, 2024.
[19] D. Martin-Lawson, S. Paladini, K. Saha, E. Yerushalmi, The cost of (Un)regulation:
shrinking Earth's orbits and the need for sustainable space governance,
J. Environ. Manag. 349 (2024) 119382.
[20] F. Lyall, P.B. Larsen, Space Law: a Treatise, second ed., Routledge, 2018.
[21] P. Blount, Legal issues related to satellite orbits, in: P. Read (Ed.), Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Planetary Science, Oxford University Press, 2022,
pp. 1–15.
[22] G. Hardin, The tragedy of the commons, Science 162 (1968) 1243–1248.
[23] E. Ostrom, Governing the Commons, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1998.
[24] E. Ostrom, Beyond markets and states. Polycentric governance of complex
economic systems, Am. Econ. Rev. 100 (2010) 1–33.
[25] M.K. Macauley, Regulation on the final frontier, Regulation 26 (2) (2003) 36–41.
[26] B.C. Weeden, T. Chow, Taking a common-pool resources approach to space
sustainability: a framework and potential policies, Space Policy 28 (2012)
166–172.
[27] T. Dietz, E. Ostrom, P.C. Stern, The struggle to govern the commons, Science 302
(12) (2003) 1907–1912.
[28] B.G. Chow, Space arms control: a hybrid approach, Strategic Studies Quarterly 12
(2) (2018) 107–132.
[29] H.R. Hertzfeld, S.N. Pace, International cooperation on human lunar heritage,
Science 342 (2013) 1049–1050.
[30] M.S. Snow, Investment cost minimization for communications satellite capacity:
refinement and application of the Chenery-Manne-Srinivasan model, Bell J. Econ.
6 (2) (1975) 621–643.
[31] L.B. Early, C. Reber, P. Caughran, Economics of communications satellite systems1976, Acta Astronaut. 5 (3–4) (1978) 261–273.

14

A. Bongers et al.

Space Policy xxx (xxxx) xxx

[70] A. Rao, M. Moretto, M. Holzinger, D. Kaffine, B. Weeden, OPUS: an Integrated
Model for Satellites and Orbital Debris, 2023 arXiv preprint 2309.10252.
[71] W. Nozawa, K. Kurita, T. Tamaki, S. Managi, To what extent will orbital debris
impact the economy? Space Policy 66 (2023) 101580.
[72] A. Bongers, C. Ortiz, J.L. Torres, DISE: a dynamic integrated space-economy
model for orbital debris mitigation policy evaluation, Environ. Resour. Econ. 88
(8) (2025) 2125–2156.
[73] A. Bongers, B. Molinari, J.L. Torres, Optimal Satellite Shielding and Orbital
Debris, 2026. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics.
[74] M.K. Macauley, M.A. Toman, Providing earth observation data from space:
economics and institutions, Am. Econ. Rev. 81 (2) (1991) 38–41.
[75] M.K. Macauley, M.A. Toman, Supplying earth-observation data from space, Space
Policy 8 (1) (1998) 16–22.
[76] T.A. Croft, Nighttime images of the Earth from space, Sci. Am. 239 (1) (1978)
86–101.
[77] D. Donalson, A. Storeygard, The view from above: applications of satellite data in
economics, J. Econ. Perspect. 30 (4) (2016) 171–198.
[78] J. Gibson, S. Olivia, G. Boe-Gibson, Night lights in economics: sources and uses,
J. Econ. Surv. 34 (5) (2020) 955–980.
[79] G.D. Elvidge, K.E. Baugh, E.R. Kihn, H.W. Kroehl, E.R. Davis, C.W. Davis, Relation
between satellites' observed visible-near-infrared emissions, population, and
energy consumption, Int. J. Rem. Sens. 18 (1997) 1373–1379.
[80] P.C. Sutton, R. Costanza, Global estimates of market and non-market values
derived from nighttime satellite imagery, land cover, and ecosystem service
valuation, Ecol. Econ. 41 (3) (2002) 507–527.
[81] Steve Ebener, Christopher Murray, Ajay Tandon, Christopher Elvidge, From
wealth to health: modeling the distribution of income per capita at the subnational level using nighttime lights imagery, Int. J. Health Geogr. 4 (5) (2005)
5–14.
[82] C.N. Doll, J.P. Muller, J.G. Morley, Mapping regional economic activity from
night-time light satellite imagery, Ecol. Econ. 57 (1) (2006) 75–92.
[83] M. Burchfield, H.G. Overman, D. Puga, M.A. Turner, Causes of sprawl: a portrait
from space, Q. J. Econ. 121 (2) (2006) 587–633.
[84] J.V. Henderson, A. Storeygard, D.N. Weil, A bright idea for measuring economic
growth, Am. Econ. Rev. 101 (3) (2011) 194–199.
[85] J.V. Henderson, A. Storeygard, D.N. Weil, Measuring economic growth from the
outer space, Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (29) (2012) 994–1028.
[86] J.K. Galimberti, Forecasting GDP growth from outer space, Oxf. Bull. Econ. Stat.
82 (4) (2020) 697–722.
[87] X. Chen, W.D. Nordhaus, VIIRS nighttime lights in the estimation of crosssectional and time-series GDP, Remote Sens. 11 (9) (2019) 1057.
[88] P.C. Sutton, C.D. Elvidge, T. Ghosh, Estimation of gross domestic product at subnational scales using nighttime satellite imagery, Int. J. Ecol. Econ. Stat. 8 (S07)
(2007) 5–21.
[89] X. Chen, W.D. Nordhaus, Using luminosity data as a proxy for economic statistics,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 (21) (2011) 8589–8594.
[90] M. Pinkovskiy, X. Sala-i-Martin, Lights, camera…income! illuminating the
national accounts-household surveys debate, Q. J. Econ. 131 (2) (2016) 579–631.
[91] M. Pinkovskiy, X. Sala-i-Martin, Shining a light on purchasing power parities, Am.
Econ. J. Macroecon. 23 (4) (2020) 71–108.
[92] Y. Hu, J. Yao, Illuminating economic growth, J. Econom. 228 (2) (2022)
359–378.
[93] D. Koplow, ASAT-Isfaction: Customary international law and the regulation of
anti-satellite weapons, Mich. J. Int. Law 30 (2009) 2009.

[94] A. White, Space War: the Militarization and Weaponization of Space, Michigan
State University College of Law International Law Review, February, 2017.
[95] D. Wright, The Space Environment: 2011, Union of Concerned Scientists, 2011.
https://www.ucsusa.org/.
[96] B. Dobos, J. Prazak, To clear or to eliminate? Active debris removal systems as
antisatellite weapons, Space Policy 47 (2019) 217–223.
[97] P.J. Phillips, G. Pohl, Space junk: behavioural economics and the prioritisation of
solutions, Defence Peace Econ. 32 (8) (2021) 956–971.
[98] P. Bernat, The inevitability of militarization of outer space, Safety and Defense 5
(1) (2019) 1–6.
[99] A. Bongers, J.L. Torres, Star wars: anti-satellite weapons and orbital debris,
Defense and Peace Economics 35 (7) (2024) 826–845.
[100] McKinsey, Space: the $1.8 Trillion Opportunity for Global Economic Growth,
2024. Report.
[101] L.W. Wood, A.Q. Gilbert, Space-based solar power as a catalyst for space
development, Space Policy 59 (2022) 101451.
[102] Fortune Business Insights, Global Navigation Satellite System Market Size, Share
and Industry Analysis, 2024. Report.
[103] Precedence Research, Satellite Communications (SATCOM) Market Size and
Forecast 2025 to 2034, 2025. Report.
[104] Space Foundation, The Space Report Q2, The Space Foundation, 2025.
[105] M.J. Sonter, The technical and economic feasibility of mining the near-Earth
asteroids, Acta Astronaut. 41 (4–10) (1997) 637–647.
[106] A.M. Hein, R. Matheson, D. Fries, A techno-economic analysis of asteroid mining,
Acta Astronaut. 168 (2020) 104–115.
[107] A. Sommariva, L. Gori, B. Chizzolini, M. Pianorsi, The economics of moon mining,
Acta Astronaut. 170 (2020) 712–718.
[108] M.L. Weitzman, Pricing the limits to growth from minerals depletion, Q. J. Econ.
114 (2) (1999) 691–706.
[109] F.M. Paterson, A model of mining and exploring exhaustible resources, J. Environ.
Econ. Manag. 5 (1978), 326-251.
[110] C. Dahl, B. Gilbert, I. Lange, Mineral scarcity on Earth: are asteroids the answers,
Mineral Economics 33 (2020) 29–41.
[111] M. Fleming, I. Lange, S. Shojaeinia, M. Stuermer, Mining in space could spur
sustainable growth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 120 (43) (2023) e2221345120.
[112] M.K. Macauley, J.F. Davis, An economic assessment of space solar power as a
source of electricity for space-based activities, Space Policy 18 (1) (2002) 45–55.
[113] E. Cohen, S. Spector, Space Tourism: the Elusive Dream, EmeralD Publishing,
2019.
[114] S. Spector, J.E.S. Higham, Space tourism in the anthropocene, Ann. Tourism Res.
79 (2019) 102772.
[115] Y. Zhang, L. Wang, Progress in space tourism studies: a systematic literature
review, Tour. Recreat. Res. 47 (4) (2020) 372–383.
[116] Market Research Future, Space-Based Solar Power Market Research Report, 2025.
[117] ESA, Annual Report, ESA, 2023.
[118] N. Adilov, B.M. Cunningham, P.J. Alexander, N. Albertson, An analysis of launch
cost reductions for low Earth orbit satellites, Econ. Bull. 42 (3) (2022) 1–15.
[119] B.C. Weeden, Overview of the legal and policy challenges of orbital debris
removal, Space Policy 28 (3) (2011) 38–43.
[120] C.P. Mark, S. Kamath, Review of active space debris removal methods, Space
Policy 47 (2019) 194–206.
[121] A.W. Salter, Space debris: a law and economics analysis of the orbital commons,
Stanford Technol. Law Rev. 19 (2016) 221–238.

15

