Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Ecological Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolecon

Analysis

Orbital debris and the market for satellites✩
Anelí Bongers, José L. Torres ∗
Department of Economics, University of Málaga, Málaga, Spain

ARTICLE
JEL classification:
D62
Q53
L80
Keywords:
Outer space
Satellites
Launches
Debris
Risk of collision
Kessler syndrome

INFO

ABSTRACT
This paper studies the economic consequences of orbital debris for commercial outer-space activities. Spacecraft
launches and other outer-space human activities produce pollution (i.e., orbital debris), which represent a
hazardous negative externality increasing the risk of collision and the destruction of satellites. We regard outer
space as a global common resource, where firms operating satellites maximize profits and do not internalize
the social cost of orbital pollution. We develop a dynamic investment model for satellites and simulate the
calibrated model to estimate how debris affects the optimal quantity of satellites and launches, and the number
of satellites destroyed by collisions. We find that the optimal quantity of satellites is a negative function of the
amount of debris. The paper derives a simple expression for the maximum number of satellites to prevent the
Kessler syndrome. For the baseline calibration of the model, the estimated threshold for the maximum number
of satellites in orbit is about 72,000. The model is simulated to study the effects of a decline in the launch
cost and the increasing number of satellites per launch.

1. Introduction
Although the human exploration and economic exploitation of the
outer space are quite recent (the first successful launch of a humanmade spacecraft occurred in 1957), a number of market failures are
arising at rocket speed as the commercial, military, and scientific activities in space are continuously expanding. Outer space is an example of
an extra-terrestrial common resource. No agent (national government
or international organization) has authority over the property rights of
space, with the exception of spacecraft ownership; therefore, human
activities in space, including commercial ones, are not subject to any
centralized regulation or property rights. In this (non-)regulatory environment, outer space exhibits the characteristics of a global common
resource and hence is subject to comparable economic failures to other
international commons on the Earth (i.e., fisheries in international
waters, the atmosphere, or Antarctica). A large number of countries

has signed several treaties and principles regarding human activities in
the outer space. The first international agreement that has established a
list of basic principles to regulate human activity outside planet Earth
is the Outer Space Treaty (OST).1 However, the principles instituted
in the OST represent a set of basic rules with a very limited scope
to which countries pursuing activities in outer space are subject, and
it cannot be considered as a fully operational regulatory framework
but one in which the ‘‘first come, first serves’’ principle dominates.
The consequences of this lack of regulation were clearly expressed by
Hardin (1968), who pointed out that ‘‘ Freedom in a commons brings
ruin to all’’. Nevertheless, Ostrom (2010) demonstrated the possibility
of avoiding the ‘‘tragedy of the commons’’ without privatization or
government regulation. However, Weinzierl et al. (2016) show that the
conditions for the kind of cooperation proposed by Ostrom are absent
in the space.

✩ We thank Dimitrios Pontikakis, Benedetto Molinari, three anonymous referees and the Editor for very useful comments and suggestions on a previous version
of the paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities, Spain through grant PID2019107161GB-C33. A. Bongers acknowledges financial support from Junta de Andalucía, Spain through grant PAIDI-2020-21-00853. Funding for open access charge:
Universidad de Málaga/CBUA.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jtorres@uma.es (J.L. Torres).
1
The exact denomination of the OST is the ‘‘Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies’’. The OST enumerates the basic principles for human activity in outer space to be followed by nations (not private companies as
the Treaty was signed in 1967, when only governments had the technology and financial resources to access space), including freedom of access and exploration,
no sovereignty, and peaceful purposes. The basic principles of the OST were later extended by other additional four treaties, together with other agreements
and conventions on more specific issues, including orbital debris. The full list of treaties can be found in https://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/
treaties.html. These treaties and agreements have been ratified by a large number of states, except the Moon agreement, which has been ratified by only 18
states to this day.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107831
Received 29 August 2022; Received in revised form 7 February 2023; Accepted 23 March 2023
Available online 30 March 2023
0921-8009/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

(2015). Adilov et al. (2015) developed a Salop-type model (Salop,
1979), for comparing the optimal number of launches in a decentralized
versus a centralized market. They found that the numbers of satellites
and launches are higher than the social optimum as firms do not
take into account the negative externality of debris generated by their
activities in space. Given that the negative externality affects all firms,
there is under-investment in debris mitigation technologies. Adilov
et al. (2018) used a net present value approach to determine that
the threshold level of debris for economic viability is lower than the
‘‘Kessler syndrome’’ level identified by Kessler and Cour-Palais (1978).
They found an initial positive relationship between launches and debris, to replace satellites destroyed, the relationship being negative
after a threshold level of debris is reached. Macauley (2015) presented
different technological strategies to mitigate debris generation and/or
collision risk, including maneuvering capability, graveyarding capability and shielding. Klima et al. (2016) used a game theory approach
whereby spacefaring agencies have the option of implementing costly
active debris removal interventions that benefit all spacefaring agents
or waiting for other agents carry out the work. Grzelka and Wagner
(2019) developed a model containing property rights and instruments
to incentivize ex ante increases in satellite quality, and collective
or individual debris take-back interventions. Béal et al. (2020) compared the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium with a tax on launches
to finance debris mitigation, with the welfare optimal traffic under a
centralized tax. They found that, under a centralized tax, the traffic
is increased and the debris mitigation cost is reduced compared with
the non-cooperative scenario. Rouillon (2020) considered a model with
a constant rate of satellite launches and concluded that the number
of satellites is an inverted-U shape function of the launch rate. Rao
et al. (2020) developed a model with infinity-lived satellites to study
the implications of Pigouvian taxation consisting of an international
orbital-use fee. Adilov et al. (2020) simulated the quantity of orbital
debris under different policies, including a launch tax, voluntary debris
mitigation, and active debris removal policies. Guyot and Rouillon
(2022) study an environment where satellite operators make choices
about the design of satellites while in-orbit servicing firms supply
efforts to remove space debris. Finally, Bernhard et al. (2023) use a
dynamic game to assess the impact of satellite mega-constellations on
space debris and explore alternative taxation schemes for financing
active debris removal policies.
The contribution of this paper to the literature is twofold, focusing
on two key issues not previously addressed by the literature, that can be
summarized in the following two research questions. First, what is the
cost of the negative externality created by orbital debris? Second, what
is the maximum number of satellites to prevent the Kessler syndrome?
With the aim at answering the previous two research questions, this
paper develops a model based on the standard neoclassical dynamic
investment model to explore the consequences of orbital debris for
the optimal number of satellites and launches, and the implications
of launch cost declines and an increasing number of satellites per
launch. It is assumed a perfect competitive environment in which firms
maximize profits by choosing the optimal number of satellites launches.
Given the characteristics of the outer-space market, in which there
is no supervisory authority, the optimal number of satellites depends
on the risk of destruction through collision with debris. The model is
solved for a decentralized economy, in which the negative externality
arising from debris is not internalized by firms, under two alternative
scenarios representing different stages of space exploration. First, we
consider an initial stage in human outer-space activities in which the
amount of debris is small enough that the probability of collision is
practically zero. In this scenario, firms maximize the sum of discounted
profits without considering any externalities provoked by their activity.
Second, we consider a second stage in which the amount of debris starts
to be large enough to lead to a non-negligible probability of collision
and in which this risky environment is incorporated into the firm’s
maximization problem. However, pollution in space shows a crucial

The economic analysis of outer space is attracting increasing attention from scholars, although it is still too early to refer to a new research
field as outer space economics. The foundations for the economics of
outer space were constructed by O’Neill (1977) and Sandler and Shulze
(1981). See Weinzierl (2018) for a review of the development of the
space economy. O’Neill (1977) was the first to study the feasibility
of space human colonies from an economic perspective. The pathbreaking contribution by Sandler and Shulze (1981) enumerated and
studied a number of economic issues related to commercial and other
activities in outer space, including broadband, rights over the geostationary orbit, and the risk of collision. An earlier work by Snow (1975)
developed a model for communication satellite capacity. Although the
first human activities in outer space were carried out by nations, given
the initial technological and financial barriers, private companies are
progressively gaining importance. Indeed, a large variety of industries
are expected to be developed in the near future, additional to the
industries that are already well established (broadcasting and communications services, positioning services, Earth observation, etc.), other
than military and scientific activities. Commercial activities in space
generate around $300 billion in annual revenues (Weinzierl, 2018).
Industries such as space manufacturing of special goods for customers
on Earth using microgravity, vacuum and extreme temperatures (Patel,
2019), in-space manufacturing and maintenance and repair services
(Prater et al., 2018), asteroid mining (Ross, 2002), and space tourism
(Peeters, 2010), among others, are expected to be developed in the
foreseeable future, further congesting outer space and generating more
space pollution.
One of the issues that has attracted attention from academics in
different disciplines is the market failure leading to the generation
of space debris.2 Debris is a type of space pollution than could have
dramatic consequences for commercial and other activities in outer
space (Liou and Johnson, 2006). Launching satellites and carrying out
other operations in orbit generate debris that can collide with operational artificial satellites, with fatal consequences in some cases. Even
small debris with little mass can have catastrophic consequences for
the affected spacecraft due to high velocities. On the other hand, space
debris is self-propagating, as collisions between pieces of debris create
more debris. This is the so-called ‘‘Kessler syndrome’’ representing a
scenario of collisions in cascade (Kessler and Cour-Palais, 1978). Debris
is generated from different sources, including parts of launch vehicles
and rocket bodies, non-functional satellites, the breaking-up of satellites
and rocket bodies, and even tools lost by astronauts, but also by natural
sources.3
Seminal papers studying the economic consequences of orbit debris
are Adilov, Alexander and Cunningham (2015, 2018) and Macauley

2
As defined by NASA, ‘‘orbital debris is any human-made object in orbit
that no longer serves a useful purpose, including spacecraft fragments and
retired satellites’’.
3
The main cause of in-orbit explosions is related to residual fuel that
remains in the tanks of rockets’ upper stages or derelict satellites abandoned
in orbit. The extreme conditions in outer space quickly cause mechanisms and
devices to deteriorate, leading to leaks mixing fuel components, which provoke
accidental explosions that break-up rocket bodies and other spacecraft, and
generate a large number of fragments that travel around the initial orbit at
hyper-velocity (above 10,000 kilometer per hour). Besides such accidental
break-ups, spacecraft interceptions by surface-launched missiles have been a
major contributor in the recent past. Four countries, the US, Russia, China
and India have conducted direct-ascend anti-satellite tests. A single event,
the intentional destruction of the Chinese Feng-Yun 1C satellite by a missile
in January 2007, increased the trackable space debris population by 30%
(OECD, 2020). Most debris (around 85%) is at a Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
altitude (below 2000 kilometers), with peak concentration around an altitude
of 700–900 km (NASA, 2020). Nevertheless, the environment in the outer
space is in continuous transformation. For instance, new launches of satellite
constellations (such as the Starlink network) will transform significantly the
environment at low Earth orbit (LEO).

2

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Human activity in space provokes a negative externality (a kind
of pollution) related to launches and other activities in orbit. This
pollution takes the form of human-produced space debris (or junk).
Debris poses a danger to operating satellites as they can be damaged
or destroyed by collisions. The model considers the average probability
of destruction of a satellite through a collision with space debris. This
reduces the expected profits from launching a satellite. The destruction
risk depends on the probability of a hit times the amount of debris.
Therefore, in each period, the number of operational satellites can
be reduced in the figure resulting from the destruction risk times the
number of satellites. The average probability of collision used in this
paper is an important simplification assumption in the model, as this
probability varies with orbital altitude and the size of the objects.
On the other hand, probability of collision also depends whether the
debris at risk of collision is trackable or not. Contrary to other types of
pollution on Earth, pollution in outer space presents two main distinct
characteristics. First, this type of outer-space pollution has a direct
negative affect on the stock of capital assets of firms in this market.
Second, pollution is self-propagating, which could result in an explosive
path that makes human activities in the Earth’s orbits impractical (the
Kessler syndrome).

difference from pollution on Earth: space junk has a negative impact
on firms’ stock of capital assets.
We find that debris has a negative impact on the equilibrium
quantity of satellites compared with an ideal outer-space environment
with no debris. The parameters of the model are calibrated to the
present conditions observed in outer space. We measure forgone satellite services as the cost of this negative externality. The estimated
relationship between launches and debris resulting from the calibrated
model is negative. We derive a simple expression for the maximum
number of satellites that can be inserted into orbit to prevent the Kessler
syndrome. This threshold value for the number of satellites is a function
of the physical parameters, resulting in a value of around 72,000
satellites for the baseline calibration. Nevertheless, this figure should
be taken with caution, as this is an average number for the different
orbits and it depends on the base line calibration of the model. Orbits
have different level of congestion, available volumetric space, debris
concentration, atmospheric drag, satellites of different volume and
mass, etc. The calibrated model is used to carry out several simulations
to investigate the consequences of a reduction in the launch costs,
and an increase in the number of satellites per launch. As expected,
as the launch cost decreases or the number of satellites per launch
increases, the optimal number of satellites increases up to the threshold
for the Kessler syndrome. Increased activity in the space also causes an
increase in the amount of debris and the number of satellites destroyed
by collision, reducing the economic benefits of the per satellite launch
cost reduction. The social cost of debris is estimated at around $11.5
billions annually.
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents
a simple economic model for satellites based on the standard dynamic
investment model extended to consider the negative externality from
orbital debris. Section 3 calibrates the physical and economic parameters of the model. Section 4 uses the calibrated model to simulate
alternative scenarios and estimate the cost of the externality from
debris. Finally, Section 5 concludes.

2.1. Model setup
We assume a competitive market with 𝑁 identical firms launching
and operating satellites. Infinity-lived firms operating in outer space
maximize the sum of the discounted profits (the present value of future
receipts, 𝑉𝑖,0 ), defined as 𝛱𝑖,𝑡 , for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁.
max 𝑉𝑖,0 = 𝐸𝑡

∞ (
)𝑡
∑
1
𝛱𝑖,𝑡
1+𝑟
𝑡=0

(1)

where 𝐸𝑡 is the expectation operator, 1∕(1 + 𝑟) is the discount factor,
and 𝑟 is the interest rate, which is assumed to be constant. Firm 𝑖 profits
are defined as,

2. An economic model for satellites

𝛱𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑃𝑡 𝑠𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑐𝑖 𝑙𝑖,𝑡

We consider a market for satellite services (communications, broadcasting, Earth observation, weather and climate monitoring, geographical positioning, etc.). Although a large number of human-made objects
in orbit are military or scientific-purpose spacecraft, we focus on commercial activity as outer space is moving from a government-run to a
private firm-managed but state regulated environment (see Weinzierl
and Acocella, 2016; Weinzierl, 2018; BryceTech, 2022).4 The incipient
exploration of outer space, given the initial technological and cost
barriers, was conducted by states, but, in the last decades, the private
sector has expanded significantly, and new types of business with a
higher private presence are expected to be developed in the future. We
assume a competitive market in which infinite-lived space-operating
firms maximize the sum of discounted profits from satellite services.5
To increase the number of satellites in orbit, additional investment in
launches is necessary. We assume that the launching cost includes all
the costs of manufacturing a satellite and the launching vehicle, the
cost of the launch, and the operating cost during the life-span of the
satellite.6

(2)

where 𝑃𝑡 is the market price, 𝑠𝑖,𝑡 is the number of satellites in orbit
by firms 𝑖, 𝑙𝑖,𝑡 is the number of launches by firms 𝑖, and 𝑐𝑖 represents
the cost per launch. For simplicity, we assume that 𝑐𝑖 is exogenously
given and that space operating firms have perfect-foresight. The total
number of operational satellites in orbit is given by 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑁𝑠𝑖,𝑡 .7
Satellites produces services for consumers on Earth. We assume that
the technology function for satellite services producing revenues for
the industry is given by 𝑃𝑡 𝑆𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡 𝑆𝑡𝛼 . The parameter 𝛼 (0 < 𝛼 < 1)
represents the elasticity of satellite services with respect to the quantity
of satellites, which is assumed to be lower than one indicating the
existence of decreasing returns given the demand for satellite services.
𝐴𝑡 is a measure of productivity, representing technological change in
the production of satellite services, which it is assumed to be exogenous
and identical for all the firms.
Since firms are price-takers under perfect competition, the marginal
income for an extra satellite equals the market price given by,
𝑃𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡 𝑆𝑡𝛼−1

4
The number of satellites operated by private-firms related to governments
is increasing, but the overall budgets for space activities are still predominantly
government, being the US government the leading operator. However, governmental decisions are difficult to be modeled as they are motivated by a set of
non-economic factors other than profit-maximization.
5
The assumption that economic agents are infinite-lived is standard in
economics, meaning that, in each moment of time, economic agents take
decisions considering their impact in the future.
6
For the sake of simplicity it is assumed that operating cost is a fixed cost.
It is true that in case of collision, lifespan is reduced and also the operating
cost should be reduced. However, given that probability of collision is already
small, we abstract for introducing such complexity into the model.

(3)

which is also the demand function.
The stock of operational satellites in orbit in period 𝑡 + 1 by firms 𝑖
follows the law of motion,
𝑠𝑖,𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑠 )𝑠𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑙𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑥𝑖,𝑡

(4)

where 0 < 𝛿𝑠 < 1 is the physical depreciation rate of satellites, and 𝑥𝑖,𝑡 is
the number of satellites of firm 𝑖 destroyed by collision with debris in

7
Given the heterogeneity in the characteristics of satellites (i.e., mass and
volume), the model considers the number of a representative satellite.

3

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

every period. Physical depreciation refers to the number of satellites
that each period ends their operational lifetime. The parameter 𝜂
represents the number of satellites per successful launch. Failures or
accidental explosions of satellites during the launch are also included
in this parameter. In practice, the value of this parameter is increasing
over time, as micro-satellites’ design and more powerful launch systems
increase the number of satellites that can be inserted into orbit with
the same launch rocket. Nevertheless, for simplicity, it is assumed that
the quantity of satellites per launch is one in the baseline scenario
(i.e., every satellite inserted into orbit is considered to be a launch).
Total number of launches are 𝐿𝑡 = 𝑁𝑙𝑖,𝑡 and the total number of
satellites destroyed by collision with debris is given by 𝑋𝑡 = 𝑁𝑥𝑖,𝑡 .
Therefore, the total stock of operational satellites in orbit in period 𝑡+1
follows the law of motion,
𝑆𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑠 )𝑆𝑡 + 𝜂𝐿𝑡 − 𝑋𝑡

where 𝛾 > 0 is the amount of new debris generated by the destruction
of a satellite, 𝜔 > 0 is the amount of debris generated per launch,
0 < 𝜒 < 1 is the percentage of derelict satellites that remains in
the orbit, and 𝜐 > 0 is the quantity of new debris generated by selfcollisions. As above, we assume that the probability of collision is
proportional to the quantity of debris. It is assumed that the debris
generated per launch include explosions and fragmentations produced
by last-stages rockets. The parameter 𝛿𝑑 (0 < 𝛿𝑑 < 1) represents the
decay rate of debris. This decay rate mainly depends on atmospheric
drag and therefore, is a function of the altitude of the orbit. The higher
the altitude (with respect to the Earth) of the orbit, the lower the
decay rate. Additionally, non-functional satellites (end-of-life satellites)
represents a type of debris if they are not removed from orbit. Usually,
abandoned satellites can be removed from their orbits in two different
ways, depending on their altitude, by using the last available fuel. They
can be moved to a graveyard orbit at the end of their operational life to
avoid collisions with operational satellites and the generation of new
debris if their altitude is high. If their altitude is low, they can be sent
back down to a disposal orbit where the atmospheric drag reduces their
altitude until they burn up on reentry into the Earth’s atmosphere, or,
if they survive the burning, to the spacecraft cemetery located in the
South Pacific Ocean (a mid-point between New Zealand, the Antarctica,
and Chile). However, some dead satellites do not have such capacity
(they have run out of gas) and remain in their initial orbit. This is
represented by the term 𝜒𝛿𝑠 𝑆𝑡 , where the parameter 𝜒 represents the
fraction of non-operational satellites that remain in the initial orbit and
are not moved to a graveyard orbit (for the case of geosynchronous
spacecraft) or to a disposal orbit (for low orbit satellites) at the end of
their operational life.9 Finally, collisions among debris can also considered, represented by the term 𝜐𝜃𝐷𝑡2 , where the probability of collision
(𝜃𝐷𝑡 ) multiplies the stock of debris. Expression (8) can be extended
by including additional exogenous factors producing debris, such as
military tests with direct-ascending anti-satellite (ASAT) missiles.
Next, we use the model to study two scenarios that can represent
two stages in the exploration and exploitation of outer space: the first
stage, representing the early space race, during which little space debris
was generated and the risk of collision was negligible, and the present
second stage, during which the quantity of debris is significant and a
positive, albeit small, risk of collision exists. In this second stage, firms
that operate satellites are aware of the risk of collision and include the
costs of the possible destruction of satellites in their profit maximization
decisions.

(5)

We follow Farinella and Cordelli (1991), and assume that the collision rate is proportional to the product of debris and operating
satellites. We also assume that, in the case of collision, the satellite
is destroyed and that the collision creates a number of new pieces
of debris. An alternative way of modeling the probability of collision
was provided by Letizia et al. (2017). Here, we assume that the total
quantity of destroyed satellites is given by,
𝑋𝑡 = 𝜃𝐷𝑡 𝑆𝑡

(6)

where the term 𝜃𝐷𝑡 𝑆𝑡 results in the number of satellites destroyed in
every period by collisions with debris. It is assumed that collisions
only occur between an operational satellite and a piece of debris.8 This
implies that the number of satellites of firm 𝑖 destroyed by collision
with debris is given by
𝑥𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜃𝐷𝑡 𝑠𝑖,𝑡

(7)

The proportional parameter 𝜃 > 0 represents the probability of
collision of two objects in orbit. It is assumed that the probability of
collision of a satellite is proportional to the quantity of debris, 𝜃𝐷𝑡 .
When 𝜃𝐷𝑡 = 1, that is if the stock of debris is 𝐷𝑡 = 1∕𝜃, the probability
of collision is one. If the stock of debris reaches that value, all satellites
are destroyed by collisions in the period. Adilov et al. (2018) considered
that this reflects the ‘‘Kessler Syndrome’’ as defined by Kessler and
Cour-Palais (1978) and Kessler (1981), whereby space becomes physically unusable. Notice that the negative externality affecting the final
output is modeled in a different way from the standard environmental
externality on Earth, where it is assumed that the stock of pollution
affects to output (productivity) or household’s utility negatively in a
direct way. Here, the negative externality affects to the firms’ stock of
capital assets (satellites) directly.
Debris follows an accumulation process depending on how new
debris is produced in each period. In modeling the debris accumulation
process, we consider two main sources: launches and collisions. Different from any other source of pollution, the dynamics of orbital debris
includes a self-propagating mechanism, whereby pollution generates
additional pollution. That is, debris collides not only with satellites but
also with other pieces of debris, producing additional debris. The law
of motion of debris is given by,

2.2. Decentralized market with no debris

(8)

First, we consider the case of a decentralized market in which firms
maximize profits without considering the risk of satellite destruction
by debris. This scenario is intended to represent the early stages of
space exploration during which the amount of debris was very small
and the risk of collision was near zero. This first scenario is taken as a
benchmark for a space without congestion and externalities. The only
risk is a natural risk of collision with natural meteoroids not considered
in the model. With no debris, we arrive at the standard results of the
standard neoclassical investment model.
Each firm maximizes discounted profits (1) subject to the restriction
of the satellite accumulation process (4) in which the number of

8
We do not consider collisions among operational satellites owned by
different operators. Given the possibility of satellites with collision avoidance
capabilities, debris monitoring appears crucial. Increasing Space Situational
Awareness interventions would represent an important although partial solution to the destruction of working satellites by orbital debris. Although this
is not a solution per se to the problem of debris, would be an important
complement to other mitigation techniques.

9
To simplify the calibration of the model, it is assumed that there are no
derelict satellites left in orbit, i.e., 𝜒 = 0. This assumption can be perfectly true
in LEO orbit, where natural drag is high. On the other hand, derelict satellites
can potentially explode creating more debris, a possibility not considered by
the model. Also failures can occur preventing the execution of end-of-life
disposal maneuvers. For GEO, satellites are massive and expensive and it is
expected that they can be inserted in a disposal orbit at higher altitude.

𝐷𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑑 )𝐷𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑡 + 𝜔𝐿𝑡 + 𝜒𝛿𝑠 𝑆𝑡 + 𝜐𝜃𝐷𝑡2

4

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

(

satellites destroyed by collision is zero (𝑥𝑖,𝑡 = 0), where 𝑆0 > 0 is given.
The first-order conditions for optimality are,
)𝑡+1
(
1
𝛼−1
𝐴𝑡+1 𝑆𝑡+1
= 𝜆𝑡 − 𝜆𝑡+1 (1 − 𝛿𝑠 )
(9)
1+𝑟
(
)𝑡
1
𝑐 = 𝜆𝑡 𝜂
(10)
1+𝑟
and the transversality condition is,
(
)𝑡
1
lim 𝜆𝑡
𝑆𝑡 = 0
(11)
𝑡→∞
1+𝑟
where 𝜆𝑡 is the shadow price for constraint (4) under the no-debris
no-collision risk scenario, and is given by,
(
)𝑡
1
𝑐
(12)
𝜆𝑡 =
𝜂 1+𝑟

𝑆𝑑 =

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 )
𝜂𝐴

) 1

𝛿𝑠
𝜂

(

(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 )
𝜂𝐴

𝜆𝑡 = −𝜇𝑡

(18)

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

(

𝛼−1

(14)

𝑋 𝑑 = 𝜃𝐷𝑑

It results that 𝜕𝑆 𝑛𝑑 ∕𝜕𝑐 < 0, 𝜕𝑆 𝑛𝑑 ∕𝜕𝐴 > 0, and 𝜕𝑆 𝑛𝑑 ∕𝜕𝜂 > 0.
As the cost of launching a satellite declines, the optimal quantity of
satellites in orbit increases. On the other hand, the stock of satellites
depends positively on the number of satellites per launch. Notice that
the ratio 𝑐∕𝜂 represents the average launch cost per satellite. The cost
of launching a satellite can decline because of a decline in the cost of a
launch or due to an increase in the number of satellites per launch. The
increase in launch systems’ payload capacity and design changes that
reduce the size and weight of satellites (micro-satellites) are presented
by an increase in the parameter 𝜂.
Equivalently, the equilibrium number of launches, which is a proportion of the optimal stock of satellites, is given by,
𝐿𝑛𝑑 =

(17)

1
) 𝛼−1

(19)

resulting in a (negative) function of the amount of debris. In this
scenario as debris accumulates, a reduction in the number of satellites
in orbit is observed, given the risk of collision and destruction. As
long as the probability of collision is low enough, the negative impact
of debris on satellite activity will also be very low. However, as the
stock of debris increases, the probability of collision during the life of
a satellite escalates, reducing the equilibrium quantity of satellites.10
In computing the equilibrium, we rule out the possibility of the destruction of all satellites in the period, following Adilov et al. (2018).
Therefore, we assume that 𝜃𝐷𝑡 < 1, in order to have a positive number
of satellites in the equilibrium.
The equilibrium quantity of satellites destroyed by collisions can
also be expressed as a function of the risk of collision as,

where the equilibrium quantity of satellites in the non-debris scenario
(denoted by the superscript 𝑛𝑑) at any time is given by,
(

𝑐 = 𝜆𝑡 𝜂

where the Lagrangian multiplier 𝜆𝑡 represents to the shadow marginal
cost of launching a satellite, and the multiplier 𝜇𝑡 represent the shadow
cost of a destroyed satellite (the cost of foregone space assets). The
first-order condition (18) states that the shadow cost of launching a
satellite is equal to the negative of the shadow cost of the loss of a
satellite through a collision with debris. The equilibrium condition for
the optimal number of satellites (denoted by a superscript 𝑑), at any
time, is given by

representing the discount value of additional future profits due to one
additional launch, where the shadow marginal cost of the launch is
equal to the discounted value of the average cost of one launch per
new operating satellite in orbit. The shadow cost of the launch can be
reduced by a decline in the unitary cost per launch or by increasing the
number of satellites per launch.
The equilibrium condition for the optimal number of satellites is
given by,
)
[
(
)
]
(
1
𝑐
1
𝛼−1
𝐴𝑡+1 𝑆𝑡+1
=
1−
(1 − 𝛿𝑠 )
(13)
1+𝑟
𝜂
1+𝑟

𝑆 𝑛𝑑 =

1
1+𝑟

)𝑡

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

1
) 𝛼−1

(20)

The relationship between the number of satellites destroyed by collisions and the quantity of debris can be positive or negative, depending
on how debris affects the stock of satellites, given that
𝜕𝑋 𝑑
=𝜃
𝜕𝐷𝑑

(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

1
) 𝛼−1

+

𝑐𝜃 2 𝐷𝑑
(𝛼 − 1)𝜂𝐴

(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

2−𝛼
) 𝛼−1

≶0
(21)

whereas the first term is positive and the second is negative. The
relationship between satellites destroyed and debris depends on the
following condition:
(
)1−𝛼
𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝑐𝜃𝐷𝑑
(22)
1≶
(1 − 𝛼)𝜂𝐴
𝜂𝐴

) 1

𝛼−1

(15)

that is, for a low level of debris, the relationship between the debris
and the number of satellites destroyed by collision is positive. However,
once the debris reaches a threshold level, the relationship turns out to
be negative, as the optimal number of operational satellites in orbit
declines and not all destroyed satellites are replaced. On the other hand,
the equilibrium number of launches is given by,

and hence the ratio 𝑆 𝑛𝑑 ∕𝐿𝑛𝑑 is governed by the parameters ratio 𝜂∕𝛿𝑠 .
A reduction in launch costs will increase both the quantity of satellites
and the number of launches proportionally, except if launch system
technologies lead to a reduction in the number of satellites per launch
or in the case of design changes to extend satellites’ life-span.
2.3. Decentralized market with debris collision risk

𝑑

(

𝐿 =
The second stage of the human-use of outer space implies the
existence of a significant quantity of debris generated from the previous
stage, meaning that the risk of collision is positive. However, in this
scenario we assume that firms do not take any action to mitigate the
risk of collision and simply take the probability of destruction of a
satellite as exogenously given. This myopic behavior of firms operating
in space is justified by the nature of this market (a global commons)
with no regulation and that a operator perceives its own launching
behavior as a negligible factor of the risk of collision in a perfectly
competitive market. In this scenario firms maximizes (1) subject to (4)
and (5). The first-order conditions for optimality are,
(
)𝑡+1
1
𝛼−1
𝐴𝑡+1 𝑆𝑡+1
= 𝜆𝑡 − 𝜆𝑡+1 (1 − 𝛿𝑠 ) − 𝜇𝑡+1 𝜃𝐷𝑡+1
(16)
1+𝑟

𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑
𝜂

)(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

1
) 𝛼−1

(23)

Taking the derivative of launches with respect to debris results,
) 1
𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 ) 𝛼−1
𝜂𝐴
(
)(
) 2−𝛼
(𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )𝑐𝜃
𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 ) 𝛼−1
+
≶0
𝜂𝐴
(𝛼 − 1)𝜂 2 𝐴

𝜕𝐿𝑑
𝜃
=
𝜂
𝜕𝐷𝑑

(

(24)

10
Notice that in reality, the probability of collision does not only depend
on the amount of debris but also on whether debris are tracked or not by
ground surveillance systems, and on the collision avoidance capabilities of the
satellite.

5

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

model, the Kessler syndrome is only avoided if 𝑆 𝑑 < 𝑆 𝐾𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑟 . Given
the optimal number of satellites in the steady state, combining the
economic optimality condition and the physical threshold, we find that,

Table 1
Basic data of activity in outer space.
Successful launches
Successful satellites launches in Earth orbit
Satellites in Earth’s orbit
Operating satellites
Debris tracked by SSN
Incidents resulting in fragmentation
Debris > 10 cm
Debris between 1 cm and 10 cm
Debris between 1 mm and 1 cm

6200
13,100
8410
5600
31,150
630
36,500
1,000,000
130,000,000

(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

𝐷𝑑 >
Again, the first term is positive, whereas the second is negative.
Operating, the sign of the relationship can be positive or negative
depending on the amount of debris and on the probability of collision,

𝜃≶

𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑
1−𝛼

)(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

(

𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑
𝜂

)(

(25)

1
) 𝛼−1

−

𝛿𝑠
𝜂

(

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 )
𝜂𝐴

) 1

𝛼−1

<0

(26)
which is negative and implies that the number of launches decreases
as the amount of debris increases. Therefore, firms must face two
costs from the risk of collision: the loss of operating satellites, and the
proportion of new launches required just to replace losses.
Finally, from the law of motion of debris we can obtain a simple
expression for the maximum number of satellites before the Kessler
syndrome occurs. The steady state quantity of debris, excluding selfpropagation, as a function of the quantity of satellites, is given by:

𝐷𝑑 =

𝜔
𝛿 𝑆𝑑
𝜂 𝑠

(
)
𝛿𝑑 − 𝛾𝜃 + 𝜔𝜃
𝑆𝑑
𝜂

(27)

For the above expression to be positive (a necessary condition
for
( ruling) out explosive trajectories in debris), the condition 𝛿𝑑 >
𝛾𝜃 + 𝜔𝜃
𝑆 𝑑 must hold. This condition can be interpreted as a condi𝜂
tion for the Kessler syndrome, similar to the one developed by Adilov
et al. (2018). Adilov et al. (2018) derived a physical and an economic
Kessler conditions for the quantity of orbital debris that makes space
physically unusable and economically unprofitable, respectively, and
showed that ‘‘the space becomes economically unprofitable before it
becomes physically unusable’’. Here, we present a physical Kessler
condition in term of the maximum number of satellites, given by,
𝑆 𝐾𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑟 =

𝛿𝑑
𝜃(𝛾 + 𝜔𝜂 )

(29)

𝛾𝜃+ 𝜂

𝑐𝜃

(30)

To make the model operational to carry out simulations, we proceed
first to calibrate the parameters. Two types of parameters are present:
physical parameters related to space and spacecraft characteristics, and
economic parameters related to the production and profit functions.
Given the accelerated changes in the space industry, we calibrate the
parameters of the model to the most recent data available representing
the exploitation of outer space at present. Table 1 shows some key data
about human activity in the Earth’s orbits and the amount of debris,
as estimated by the ESA (European Space Agency) in May 2022. From
the beginning of space exploration, a total of around 6,200 successful
launches have been realized. A launch can include more than one
satellite or spacecraft. Indeed, the relationship between launches and
new satellites in orbit is changing dramatically nowadays due to the
use small and micro satellites, and to the higher power and payload
capacity of launch systems. The number of satellites in Earth orbit is
over 8410 of which 5600 are operational. The total number of pieces of
debris tracked by the United States Space Surveillance Network (SSN)
is 31,150. The number of registered incidents, including break-ups,
explosions, collisions, or anomalous events, resulting in fragmentation
is about 630. The biggest incident was the collision on February 10,
2009 of an active US communications satellite (Iridium 33), with a
defunct Russian military communications satellite (Kosmos 2251). Both
satellites were destroyed in the collision, producing a total of around
2,200 pieces of new tracked debris with a size of at least 5 cm (NASA,
2007). However, the most important incident was intentional (an antisatellite military test), resulting in the destruction of the Fengyun-1C (a
Chinese satellite) on January 1, 2011, by a kinetic weapon producing
an estimated 3,037 pieces of new tracked debris. Most of the activity
takes place at Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO, between 200 and 2000 km), and
at Geostationary Orbit (GEO, at 35,786 km).
The standard classification of orbital debris is a function of its size
and on the technical possibility of tracking it. Projections obtained
using different models for debris (for example, the LEO-to-GEO Environment Debris Model, LEGEND) have estimated amounts of around
36,500 pieces of debris larger than 10 cm diameter, 1,000,000 objects
between 1 cm and 10 cm, and over 130,000,000 fragments between
1 mm and 1 cm. The destruction power of debris smaller than 1 cm
is estimated to be low and non-fatal in the case of a collision with
a representative satellite, although they can cause serious damage in
critical systems, reducing functionality and lifespan, and even disable
small satellites. However, debris larger than 1 cm is potentially deadly
due to the high velocity of the impact. Therefore, for the calibration
of the parameters of the model we consider the estimated number

)1−𝛼

𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑑 )
𝜂𝐴

𝛿𝑑
𝛾𝜃 + 𝜔𝜃
𝜂

3. Calibration of the model

As the amount of debris increases, more satellites are destroyed
by collision, and initially, that leads to an increases in the number
of launches necessary to replace destroyed satellites. However, as the
debris continues to increase, the number of launches reduces, as the
optimal amount of satellites declines, and hence fewer destroyed satellites need to be replaced. The exact form of that relationship depends
on the value of the parameter 𝜃.
Comparing the two scenarios, we find that 𝑆 𝑛𝑑 > 𝑆 𝑑 ; that is, the
risk of collision reduces the number of satellites in orbit. The larger
the amount of debris, the smaller the optimal quantity of satellites.
However, the number of launches could be lower or higher to replace
the satellites that are lost through collisions. The difference 𝐿𝑑 − 𝐿𝑛𝑑 is
given by
𝐿𝑑 − 𝐿𝑛𝑑 =

<

From that condition, we conclude that the economic condition
for the quantity of satellites is below the Kessler threshold when the
following condition for the amount of debris holds,11
)𝛼−1
(
𝛿𝑑
− 𝑐(𝑟 + 𝛿𝑠 )
𝜂𝐴
𝜔𝜃

Source: ESA (10 May 2022)

(

1
) 𝛼−1

(28)

11
This condition is only true under the simplifying assumptions introduced
in the model. Trackability of debris, differences in orbit regimes, collision
avoidance capabilities, are all important components which would have a great
impact on this condition.

The question here is how this physical Kessler threshold compares
to the optimal quantity of satellites that maximizes profits. In our
6

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Russian military communications satellite (Kosmos 2251). On January
22, 2013 a Russian small satellite (BLITS) was destroyed by a piece of
debris from Fengyun-1C. On May 22, 2013, two CubeSats collided with
debris (Ecuador’s NEE-01 Pegaso and Argentina’s CubeBug-1). A high
number of probable collisions are avoided by maneuvering satellites
and other spacecraft frequently. Krisko (2007) estimated an average
number of catastrophic collisions (with a target and impactor larger
than 10 cm) of 0.9, whereas the estimation from the DAMAGE model
(Lewis et al., 2009) is 1.5, both for the period 1957–2006. As a result
of these collisions, a number of pieces of debris have been generated.
Farinella and Cordelli (1991) estimated a value of 𝜃 = 3 × 10−10 , for
an estimated quantity of debris of 50,000.13 This means a number
of satellite destroyed per year of 0.2, given a probability of collision
(𝜃 × 50, 000) of 1.5 × 10−5 . Kawamoto et al. (2019) estimated that the
current probability of collision is much higher. The total probability
of collision of objects larger than 10 cm is around 0.1 for 800–900 km
orbits, 0.05 for 900–1,000 km orbits, and 0.025 for 600–700 km orbits.
Following Farinella and Cordelli (1991) we take the estimation of
a total probability of collision of 0.2 (i.e., one fatal collision every
5 years) as the reference, given the number of incidents observed
during the last years (four collisions occurred in the period 1991 to
2009), resulting in the probability of collision is 𝜃 × 𝐷 = 6.6 × 10−5 .
Pardini and Anselmo (2014) estimate that the risk of collision in LEO
was multiplied by 4.5 between 1980 and 2010. To calibrate the risk
of collision, we consider the population of pieces of debris larger than
1 cm, as they can cause deadly damage to a satellite.14 Given a total
number of potentially hazardous pieces of debris of 1,036,500, this
results in a value for the risk of collision parameter of 𝜃 = 6.37 × 10−11 .

of pieces of debris larger than 1 cm. The calibration of the physical
parameters is as follows (see Table 2):
Satellite depreciation rate (𝛿𝑠 ). The extreme conditions in outer space
and manufacturing costs determine satellites life-span in orbit. A satellite’s life-span depends on the type of satellite, and on electrical,
mechanical, physical and gravitational factors (Gallois, 1987). An important limitation for satellites life-span is the fuel capacity. Indeed,
some derelict satellites could still be in good conditions operationally
and could continue to provide services but have run out of fuel, and
therefore, cannot be moved to the target orbit. The life-span varies
from 6 months for CubSats (miniaturized satellites) to 15 years of GEO
satellites. For LEO satellites the life-span varies from 3 to 8 years. As
the model is an aggregated model for any orbit, we assume an average
lifetime of 8 years, so the annual depreciation rate for satellites is fixed
to 0.1733.
Debris decay rate (𝛿𝑠 ). In more than 60 years of space activities, about
6,200 launches have resulted in some 50,000 tracked objects in orbit,
of which about 31,000 remain in space. This figures refers to objects in
orbit that are regularly tracked by the US Space Surveillance Network
and maintained in its catalogue, which covers objects larger than
about 5–10 cm in the Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) and 30 cm to 1 m at
geostationary (GEO) altitudes. Only a small fraction – about 5600
– are operational satellites. However, the total amount of debris is
much larger. Estimations from the LEGEND model have reported about
1,000,000 pieces of debris larger than 1 cm. The decay rate of debris
depends on several factors, including the altitude, mass, area, solar
radio flux, and geomagnetic index. The most important factor is the
altitude due to the atmospheric drag. The Australian Space Weather
Agency (1999) estimated that the lifetime of space objects varies from
1 day at 200 km, 1 month at 300 km, 1 year at 400 km, 10 years at
500 km, 100 years at 700 km, and 1000 years at 900 km (King-Hele,
1987). On the other hand, the distribution of debris as a function of
altitude is not homogeneous. The spatial density of debris shows that
it is concentrated in the range 700–900 km (NASA, 2020). We use the
average of this figure as a reference, and therefore, the average lifetime
is estimated at around 150 years. Assuming straight-line depreciation,
this results in an annual decay rate of 0.0067.12 This is consistent with
the value for the general atmospheric decay parameter of 0.0062 used
by Lewis et al. (2009) in the Fast Debris Evolution (FADE) model.

Number of pieces of debris per launch (𝜔). This is the primary source of
debris generation. This parameter includes not only expended rockets
and other parts discarded in the process of inserting a satellite into the
target orbit but also debris generated by explosions of launch vehicles.
We only consider debris larger than 1 cm. Debris smaller than 1 cm
are assumed not to cause fatal damage in the case of collision. Assuming that 75% of debris is generated by launches (and the remaining
25% by other events, mainly anti-satellite military tests), this implies
that launch systems are responsible for a total of 702,000 pieces of
debris from 5990 launches during a period of 70 years. Dividing both
figures, it results that 𝜔 = 117.2. However, this figure underestimates
the number of pieces of debris generated by one launch, as due to
atmospheric drag, a significant number of pieces of debris already
produced have decayed. Farinella and Cordelli (1991) estimated this
parameter assuming an average of two unintentional explosions per
year, each creating a few thousand fragments of mass greater than 1
gram, producing 70 new pieces of debris larger than 10 cm, resulting
in a total number of new pieces of debris of 2059 larger than 1 cm.15
Johnson et al. (2001) use the NASA Breakup model EVOLVE 4.0 to
estimate a number of new fragments from an explosion of 238 larger
than 10 cm, and 9,509 fragments larger than 1 cm. Lewis et al. (2009)
estimated that the number of fragments larger than 10 cm generated by
an explosion is 50, and that an average of 2.75 intact objects are added
to the environment per launch. Therefore, we assume that around 150
pieces of debris larger than 1 cm generated by each launch.

Risk of collision (𝜃). In the history of activity in outer space, a number
of collisions have been reported. Collisions can occur between pieces
of debris themselves or between debris and operational satellites. A
risk of collision between operating satellites also exists, but in some
cases they can be avoided by maneuvering, although there is a large
number of satellites with slow or not maneuver capability. Several
collisions with human-made debris have been reported in recent years,
but other incidents remain unknown. On February 10, 2009 an active
US communications satellite (Iridium 33) collided with a non-operating

12
As an example, the number of cataloged pieces of debris from the
destruction on February 10, 2009, of Kosmos 2251, was 1347. On January
1, 2011, the cataloged pieces of debris from this satellite that remained in
orbit amounted to 1273 pieces, that is, 94% of the initial debris, and this is a
decay rate of around 6% in two years. Similarly, the cataloged debris from the
destruction of Iridium 33 was 528 pieces, and the remaining debris in orbit
was 492 pieces (a 93%) on January, 1, 2011, which represents a 7% in two
years. The cataloged debris from the destruction of Fengyun-1C was estimated
to be 3,037 pieces. On January 1, 2011, the cataloged debris in orbit from
this satellite was calculated to be 2,932 pieces (97% of the initial quantity).
Given that this satellite was destroyed in a military test on January 11, 2007,
the decay rate is only 3% in four years. The difference is a consequence of the
altitude of the orbit generating debris. Whereas the first incident took place at
an altitude of 776 km, the second intentional incident occurred at an altitude
of 860 km.

13
Farinella and Cordelli (1991) estimate the number of collisions per unit
cross section per year as the average collision velocity (10 km/s) divided by
the volume of the circumterrestrial shell (1800 km×6 × 108 km2 )
14
Krag et al. (2017) studied the loss of power of Sentinel-1 A in August
2016 resulting from the collision with a small piece of debris of around 1 cm.
15
Only 3.54% of estimated pieces of debris are larger than 10 cm. The other
96.36% are between 1 cm and 10 cm. If an explosion produces 70 pieces of
debris larger than 10 cm, the total number of pieces of debris larger than 1
cm is estimated to be 70/0.034=2059.

7

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. 1. Satellites, launches and satellites destroyed in steady state by collision as a function of debris.

Number of pieces of debris per collision (𝛾). New debris generated by
collision varies greatly depending on the mass of the colliding objects.
The most relevant episode was the collision on February 10, 2009, of
a defunct Russian satellite (Kosmos 2251) and a US communication
satellite (Iridium 33), producing an estimated total of around 2000
cataloged pieces of debris (around 3.6% of the total debris being larger
than 1 cm). By contrast, the number of new pieces of debris from the
collision of Sentinel-1 A is five (Joint Space Operations Center, JSpOC).
Farinella and Cordelli (1991) estimated this figure from the typical
mass distribution of fragments generated by hypervelocity impacts,
resulting in about 10,000 fragments with a mass exceeding a few grams
in the case that the largest fragment is about 10 kilograms in mass.
Lewis et al. (2009) found that the number of pieces of debris per
catastrophic collision is 625 (collision with debris larger than 10 cm)
and 25 for a damaging collision (collision with debris between 1 and
10 cm). Given that the probability of collision is calibrated for debris
larger than 1 cm, and that the estimated number of pieces of debris
between 1 cm and 10 cm is 1,000,000 to an estimated number of pieces
of debris larger than 10 cm of 36,500, using the amount of debris per
collision estimated by Lewis et al. (2009), this implies that the number
of pieces of debris larger than 1 cm resulting from a catastrophic
collision is 17,748, and 710 in the case of a non-catastrophic collision.
The NASA Standard Breakup model calculates the number of fragments
created from the collision between two objects depending on the size
and the mass, based on laboratory hypervelocity impact experiments.
Johnson et al. (2001) show that results are similar from both models
for a mass of the two objects of 1260 kg for a catastrophic collision.
This mass is not so different from the average mass of a medium
satellite (BryceTech, 2020). Assuming that the probability of collision
is independent of the size of the debris, the final estimation is 1309
pieces of debris per collision. This figure is not so different from
the number of pieces of debris resulting from accidental explosions
estimated previously.

satellites is small relative to that of other forms of debris. Additionally,
new international standards for spacefaring countries and firms consider the necessity of including reserve fuel for de-orbiting maneuvers.
Therefore, it is expected that the number of derelict satellites that are
abandoned in orbit will tend to zero over time. Hence, we assume that
this parameter is zero to simplify the simulations.
Fragments from debris collision (𝜐). Another source of debris generation
is collision between pieces of debris. However, it is difficult to detect
these collisions, except in the case of big objects such as defunct
satellites or discarded rockets. Given that the number of large pieces
of debris is low enough, and that in case of collision of small piece of
debris additional fragments would be even smaller, we just assume that
the number of fragments from debris collision is zero (no additional
debris is produced) to simplify the model simulation. This source of new
debris should be important in the case of the Kessler syndrome if the
amount of debris reaches a threshold value with collisions in cascade.
For the economic parameters, we use standard values from the
literature. The interest rate is fixed to 4% per year (𝑟 = 0.04), whereas
the productivity parameter is normalized to one, 𝐴 = 1. The number
of satellites per launch is also normalized to one, 𝜂 = 1, as we
interpret the number of launches as being equivalent to the number of
new satellites inserted into orbit. The technological parameter for the
satellite services production function, 𝛼, is fixed to 0.85. Finally, we
calibrate the launch cost internally, to match the observed values for
the number of satellites using expression (17), resulting in 𝑐 = 1.2842,
for a quantity of satellites of 5600 and an amount of debris of 1,036,500
pieces.
4. Results: Quantitative simulations
Given the benchmark calibration of the model, we can obtain the
implicit exact relationship between debris, launches and destroyed
satellites, as given by expressions (18) and (21). Fig. 1 plots the estimated relationship between satellites, launches, and destroyed satellites
for an exogenous range of debris (from zero to 10×108 pieces of debris
larger than 1 cm). The calibrated model produces a negative relationship between debris and launches, whereas the relationship of debris
with destroyed satellites is non-monotonic, positive for a low level of
debris and negative for a higher level of debris. As the debris increases,
the optimal number of satellites declines. Simultaneously, the number
of destroyed satellites increases initially. However, destroyed satellites

Derelict satellites abandoned in orbit (𝜒). Defunct satellites abandoned
in orbit are another source of orbital debris. This occurs when satellites
run out of fuel and cannot be moved to graveyard orbits. This was
quite a common occurrence during the first stages of space conquest.
Abandoned satellites pose considerable risk, given their mass. Indeed,
one of the most harmful incident was the collision of Kosmos 2251
with Iridium 33 in February 2009. However, the number of abandoned
8

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. 2. Maximum number of satellites sensitivity analysis (debris decay rate, number of debris per launch, debris generated per collision and debris generated per launch). Circle
represents benchmark calibration.

are not fully replaced because of the larger amount of debris, leading to
a reduction in the number of launches. Second, given the lower number
of launches and satellites, the number of destroyed satellites reaches a
maximum and a further increase in the amount of debris, reduces the
number of satellites destroyed by collisions.

can be operated in the Earth’s orbit. We repeat the same calculus for a
range of values for the number of pieces of debris per launch from zero
(representing a debris-free launch system) to 500. Although launches
are the primary source of debris generation, the range for the maximum
number of satellites changes slightly. For a value of 500 pieces of debris
per launch, the maximum number of satellites is 58,143, whereas for a
scenario with no debris per launch, the maximum number of satellites
is 80,352, a figure that is only slightly above the maximum number
of satellites in the baseline scenario. A larger impact on the maximum
number of satellites is observed when the number of pieces of debris
per collision parameter is altered. We calculate the maximum number
of satellites for a range of 500 to 2000 pieces of debris per collision,
resulting in a range of 48,921 to 161,820 satellites. Finally, we study
the sensibility of the maximum number of satellites for a range from 1
to 30 satellites per launch. The maximum number of satellites increases
up to 80,046, with little gains for further increases in the number of
satellites per launch. In sum, this sensitivity analysis shows that the
maximum capacity of the Earth’s orbit, in aggregate, is well below
100,000 satellites for a plausible range of values of the parameters,
a figure higher than the number of satellites at present, but not large
enough given future projections about the number of satellites expected
to be launched, especially big satellite constellations. However, given
the differences among orbit regimes and satellites, this figure should be
considered as a first approximation to the economic capacity of space
in terms of the number of a representative satellite.
Using the calibrated model, some simulations of interest can be
carried out. First, we are interesting in simulating the model for an
exogenous path of launches to determine how the increasing activity
by inserting more satellites into orbit affects the dynamics of debris and
the risk of collision. Second, we compute the steady state quantity of
satellites under four alternative scenarios. Third, we simulate the model
for a decreasing exogenous path of launching costs. Finally, we study
the implications of increasing the number of satellites per launch.

Next, we use the calibrated model to calculate threshold values for
the quantity of satellites and debris given the present human activity
in outer space. First, we calculate the steady state maximum quantity
of satellites in orbit before the Kessler syndrome arises, given by
expression (28). This results in a maximum number of 72,090 satellites.
This figure is well above the current number of operational satellites of
5600, but it is expected that the numbers will increase faster in the next
years, mainly due to satellite constellations. Adilov et al. (2018) defined
the physical Kessler condition in terms of the amount of debris, as the
amount for which the probability of collision is one, i.e., 𝐷𝐾𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑟 =
1∕𝜃. Given the calibration of the parameter 𝜃, the threshold amount
of debris (larger than 1 cm) would be 1.57 × 1010 (compared with
the current estimated value of 1,036,500 pieces of debris). However,
the model produces an optimal quantity of satellites below one for
an amount of debris of around 7.69 × 109 (two times lower than the
physical threshold), confirming Adilov et al. (2018) result indicating
that the economic Kessler syndrome will occur before the physical
Kessler syndrome. The steady state maximum number of satellites is
a combination of five parameters: the debris decay rate, the number of
pieces of debris per launch, the number of pieces of debris per collision,
the number of satellites per launch, and the parameter representing the
risk of collision. It is worth noting that a number of relevant factors,
such as Space Situational Awareness and improving collision avoidance
capabilities, are not considered in our simulations and would have a
significant impact in the determination of the maximum number of
satellites.
We perform a sensitivity analysis for a range of values for the first
four parameters to investigate how the estimated steady state maximum
number of satellites in orbit changes with respect to the benchmark
calibration (represented by a circle). The main results are plotted in
Fig. 2. The maximum number of satellites increases as the debris decay
rate rises. For a range of the debris decay rate between 0.002 and 0.1,
the range of satellites varies from 21,520 to 107,600. These figures
demonstrate that the implementation of active debris removal policies
could be a useful instrument to enhance the number of satellites that

4.1. Exogenous path of launches
First, we simulate the model for an exogenous path of launches to
describe the physical properties of the model. In this scenario, there is
no economic decision about the optimal number of launches; hence, we
simply look at the law of motions for the stock of satellites and debris,
9

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. 3. Satellites, launches, satellites destroyed and debris given an exogenous launch path.

given an exogenous path of launches. The initial conditions represent
space activity at present, where 𝑆0 = 5600, 𝐷0 = 1, 036, 500, 𝑋0 = 0.2,
𝐿0 = 100, and an average number of satellites per launch of five. It is
assumed that the number of launches (or more specifically the number
of launched satellites) increases at a rate of 5% per year.
Fig. 3 plots the dynamics of satellites, debris and satellite destruction depending on the exogenous path of launches. The results are
similar to those obtained by Farinella and Cordelli (1991) using a two
first-order differential equations model for satellites and debris. We find
that the number of satellites increases initially, reaching a maximum,
and then it starts to decline. This is a consequence of the increasing
amount of debris, which grows exponentially, increasing the number
of satellites destroyed by collision. Indeed, the number of satellites
destroyed by collisions grows faster than the number of launches up to
a point at which the number of satellites destroyed reaches the number
of launches, where the model collapses.
The right-side plot illustrates how the different sources of new
debris changes over time. As in the case of Farinella and Cordelli
(1991), the main source of debris generation changes from primary
debris from launches, to the secondary debris generation source from
collisions. This result is obtained even if we assume no additional debris
resulting from collisions between debris, consistent with the scenario
advanced by Kessler and Cour-Palais (1978).

Table 2
Calibration of the parameters of the model.

4.2. Steady state analysis

debris scenario than in an environment with no orbital debris. This is
a considerable difference, as the risk of collision is low (the resulting
probability of collision is 0.0014) for the estimated steady state value
for debris of 2.25×107 , an amount that is 21 times higher than the
present estimated amount of debris. Notwithstanding the low risk of
collision, the estimated number of destroyed satellites is an average of
7.97.

Parameter

Definition

Value

Physical

𝛿𝑠
𝛿𝑑
𝜃
𝜔
𝛾
𝜒
𝜐

Satellite depreciation rate
Debris decay rate
Risk of collision
Number of pieces of debris per launch
Number of pieces of debris per collision
Fraction of derelict satellites
Fragments from debris collision

0.1733
0.0067
6.37×10−11
150
1,309
0.00
0.00

Economic

𝑐
𝐴
𝜂
𝛼
𝑟

Launch cost
Productivity parameter
Satellites per launch
Elasticity of satellite services
Interest rate

1.2842
1.00
1.00
0.85
0.04

Table 3
Steady state values.

Next, we calculate steady state equilibrium values for the variables
of the model for the two scenarios: no-debris, representing the initial
stages of space exploration, and debris, representing the current situation. Of course, the steady state only exists by excluding a ‘‘Kessler
syndrome’’ scenario of cascade collisions as this would imply that debris
is always increasing, and therefore, a steady state only exists if 𝜃𝐷 < 1.
Table 3 shows the steady state values for the key variables of the
model in each scenario. Notice that in steady state, and assuming that
exogenous shocks are zero (no change in the launch cost and satellite
depreciation rate), the number of satellites is a constant, depending on
the probability of collision. As expected, the equilibrium relationship
between satellites and debris is negative, resulting in a lower quantity
of satellites in the debris scenario than in the no-debris scenario.
Indeed, the steady state quantity of satellites is 4.49% lower in the

Variable

No-debris

Debris

% change

Satellites
Launches
Debris
Destroyed satellites
Satellite services

5612
972
–
–
1537

5358
936
2.25×107
7.97
1478

−4.49
−3.70
–
–
−3.84

The cost of the externality is calculated as forgone satellite services. Given the particular characteristic of this negative externality,
debris leads to an underinvestment state, reducing the number of
launches with respect to the non-debris environment. Debris increases
the probability of destruction of capital assets in orbit, which reduces
production and investment (new satellites launched). Compared with
an environment with no debris, the social cost of debris is about 3.84%
of the market, which represent a significant fraction, in spite of the low
risk of collision at present. Weinzierl (2018) showed that commercial
10

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. 4. Steady state values as a function of the launch cost.

debris reaches a value of 9.2×109 , resulting in 40,860 satellites being
destroyed each period. The Kessler syndrome appears (even without
taking cascade collisions between pieces of debris into account) when
the launch cost is zero, as all satellites are destroyed in the period
and even a fraction of the newly launched satellites is destroyed. This
simulation clearly illustrates that a further reduction in launch costs
without a mitigation policy for orbital debris would lead to a long-run
unsustainable environment in outer space.

activities in space generate around $300 billion in annual revenues.
Thus, the social cost of debris is estimated at around $11.5 billions
annually.
4.3. Launch cost reduction
An important variable driving commercial activity in outer space is
the launch cost. Indeed, the enormous cost of first-generations launch
systems was a formidable economic barrier to the earlier exploration
of outer space, an activity limited to countries with large economic
and technological resources. However, as in other industries, the costs
in the space industry have been declining over time due to learning
and technological progress. Nowadays, private spacefaring firms are
expanding their business, introducing new technologies and new launch
systems designs to reduce the costs as much as possible. Therefore,
it would be of interest to study how a cost decline will expand the
quantity of satellites, debris, and the probability of collision. In the
benchmark calibration of the model, the launch cost parameter was
calibrated internally to match the observed number of satellites in orbit
of 5600, resulting in a value of 1.2842. For this sensitivity analysis, we
solve the model for the optimal quantity of launches for a range of
values of the launch cost from 0.2 to the calibrated value of 1.2842
(a range for a reduction in costs of approximately 80%). For that, we
solve the system of equations given by (17), (18), (21) and (26) for the
range of 𝑐 = [0.2 ∶ 1.2842].
Fig. 4 plots the steady state values of the key variables as a function
of the launch cost for the debris scenario. As expected, the lower the
launch cost, the higher the number of satellites and launches. However,
a higher number of launches also increases the quantity of debris, and
hence, the number of satellites destroyed. We find that for a low enough
launch cost, the number of launches is even higher than the stock
of satellites in orbit, given the high number of satellites destroyed in
collision with debris. This is because 𝐿𝑐 < 0, 𝐿𝑐𝑐 > 0, but 𝑆𝑐 < 0,
𝑆𝑐𝑐 < 0, as a consequence of the increase in the risk of collision as
more launches occurs. This scenario will have dramatic consequences
if the removal and generation of debris do not change. With a launch
cost that is 80% lower than the benchmark calibration for the current
situation, the number of satellites will be around 69,957, a figure close
to the threshold, with a slightly lower number of satellites launched
every period (54,170 per year). The reason is that the amount of

4.4. Multiple-satellite launch systems
Finally, we investigate the implications of multiple-satellite launch
systems. Satellite design and technology changes have progressively reduced the size and weight of satellites. Indeed, a new strategy pursued
by spacefaring firms consists of the launching of a constellation of small
satellites in a low orbit. On the other hand, launch systems are more
powerful and are able to insert a heavier payload into higher orbits.
These two factors, miniaturization and launchers capacity, increase
the number of satellites per launch. This reduces the final cost of
launching a satellite, as with the same rocket and launch costs, more
than one satellite can be inserted into orbit at the same time. The
number of satellites per launch is represented by the parameter 𝜂. In
the benchmark calibration of the model we assumed that the number
of satellites per launch was one. However, an increasing number of
launches includes more than one satellite, it having become normal for
a typical launch to include two or three standard satellites. The number
of satellites per launch is substantially higher in the case of microsatellites. For example, during 2020, several SpaceX Falcon 9 were
launched with a payload of 60 Starlink satellites. Here, we simulate
the model for a range of values of the parameter 𝜂 from one to 10.
The results from this simulation exercise are plotted in Fig. 5. The
optimal number of satellites increases as the number of satellites per
launch increases, as this is equivalent to a decline in the per satellite
launch cost (for a given value of the parameter 𝑐, representing the total
launch cost). However, the relationship between the optimal number of
satellites and the number of satellites per launch is a convex function,
and, for a higher enough number of satellites per launch the effects of
further increments in the number of satellites per launch is negligible.
Increasing the number of satellites per launch increases not only the
number of satellites in orbit, but also the number of launches. Indeed,
11

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. 5. Steady state as a function of the number of satellites per launch.

the number of launches shows a similar path to that of satellites.
For an average of 10 satellites per launch, the steady state number
of satellites is 79,314, approaching the threshold value. The number
of launches is of 11,054, with a total of 96,794 satellites destroyed
each period, as the amount of debris reaches a value of 1.9×1010 .
This means that all satellites plus a fraction of the new launches are
destroyed each period. The optimal number of satellites in the steady
state reaches a maximum close to the threshold, even if the number
of satellites per launch increases further. A similar maximum, about
10,000 launches (each with 10 satellites) is observed. The explanation
is that the lower launch cost is compensated for by the higher number
of destroyed satellites. Indeed, as both the number of launches and
the number of satellites increases, so does the number of collisions
(satellites destroyed). Finally, given the higher number of launches and
the larger number of collisions, the debris increases steadily.

about 72,000, a figure that is much larger than the current population
of satellites but not so high as to prevent it from been reached in the
near future given the expected launches of several satellite constellations containing thousands of satellites each. A sensitivity analysis is
carried out, resulting in little variability of that threshold value. The
consequences of launch cost declines and the increase in the number
of satellites per launch are also investigated.
The results show that without debris mitigation both passive and
active policies, outer space will collapse in the near future, with the
destruction of a large number of satellites through collisions with
debris. Even without a further reduction in launch costs, the amount
of debris will increase before stabilizing, reducing the optimal number
of operating satellites with respect to the present observed figure, and
causing the destruction of about three satellites per year. As highlighted
in the analysis done in this paper, the economic Kessler threshold for
the number of satellites is lower than the physical Kessler threshold,
so we would expect that space operators are interesting in the implementation of debris mitigation strategies well before the cascade
effect. Further analyses in this direction are needed as debris mitigation
policies, both active and passive, must be designed and implemented
to expand the maximum limit for the number of satellites, reduces the
number of satellites destroyed by collisions, and mitigate the production of new debris. Finally, it is worth noting that our model is an
aggregate approximation of the orbital market. The results presented
here are sensitive to the altitude of the satellites. The lower the altitude,
the fewer the negative consequences of debris, as atmospheric drag is
a drain of orbital pollution. The altitude of new satellites, especially
those in large satellite constellations, will be the key to predicting the
economic implications of human activity in outer space, and hence, a
more disaggregated model distinguishing between LEO and GEO worth
be developed.

5. Concluding remarks
This paper presents a dynamic investment model for satellites in
which outer space is a polluted environment presenting a risk of collision and destruction of satellites. The model considers an unregulated
market in which orbits are a common source and human activity in
outer space produces a negative externality in the form of space debris. Orbital debris is potentially hazardous and can destroy operating
satellites in the case of collision. Debris is generated by launches,
accidental explosions of rockets, anti-satellite military tests, collisions
among debris, and collisions with satellites, among other sources. One
of the particular characteristics of the negative externality of debris
compared to other forms of pollution is that it affects to the stock of
capital assets directly. This leads to an underinvestment situation with
respect to an optimal environment with no debris.
We use the calibrated model to evaluate alternative scenarios. First,
we compare the current scenario with debris with an ideal benchmark
scenario with no debris. As expected, this negative externality reduces
the activity in the market, decreasing the number of satellites, when the
expected loss from a satellite destruction is taken into account by firms.
The larger the quantity of debris, the smaller the optimal quantity of
satellites. The model produces a simple expression for the maximum
quantity of satellites to prevent the Kessler syndrome, depending on a
combination of parameters. Given the baseline calibration of the model,
the estimated aggregate threshold value for the quantity of satellites is

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
12

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

Fig. A.1. Threshold number of satellites as a function of the debris decay rate. The
circle denotes the baseline value.

Fig. A.2. Threshold number of satellites as a function of new fragments from
debris-to-debris collisions. The circle denotes the baseline value.

Appendix

Operating, we get,
(
)
]
𝜔𝛿𝑠
𝜔𝜃
𝐷 𝛿𝑑 − 𝛾𝜃 +
𝑆 − 𝜐𝐷 =
𝑆
𝜂
𝜂
[

This appendix extends the analysis done in the paper in two directions. First, we consider alternative values for the debris decay rate. The
debris decay rate is a key parameter to calculate the threshold for the
quantity of satellites to prevent the economical Kessler syndrome. The
decay rate of orbital debris depends on the altitude, where atmospheric
drag is high for low altitude but declines for higher altitude orbits
and on other factors (mass, area, and solar radio flux). In the baseline
calibration, the natural debris decay rate takes a value of 0.0067.
This is an average value for all Earth’s orbits, and it depends on the
distribution of debris across orbits, with most debris concentrated at
700–900 km.
Fig. A.1 plots the relationship between the maximum number of
satellites and the debris decay rate for a range of values between 0
and 0.025. For a debris decay rate of zero (all debris remains forever
in orbit), the steady-state maximum number of satellites is zero. In
this case, the amount of debris is always increasing, rendering the
space unusable in the long-run. As the debris decay rate becomes
positive, also the steady-state maximum number of satellites becomes
positive. For a debris decay rate of 0.025, the steady-state maximum
number of satellites is 𝑆 𝐾𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑟 = 269,000). Therefore, increasing the
debris decay rate allows expanding the usage of the space with more
satellites. This result indicates that changes in the design of satellites
and in launch systems to minimize the creation of debris together with
the implementation of active debris removal policies are important
instruments to prevent the Kessler syndrome while allowing to increase
the number of satellites in orbit.
Second, we extend the law of motion of debris by including the
possibility of debris-to-debris collisions as an additional source of debris
creation. In this case, the debris’ law of motion is given by,

where the term in brackets in the left side must be positive. From that
condition, we obtain the following threshold value for the maximum
number of satellites now as a function of the stock of debris,
𝑆 𝐾𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑟 =

Fig. A.2 plots the maximum number of satellites for the current
stock of debris (𝐷 = 1, 036, 500) as a function of the number of new
fragments created by debris self collisions, 𝜐. We use a range of values
for the parameter 𝜐 from zero (baseline case) to 10. The threshold
number of satellites is a negative function of the number of new
fragments created by debris-to-debris collisions.

References
Adilov, N., Alexander, P.J., Cunningham, B.M., 2015. An economic analysis of earth
orbit pollution. Environ. Resour. Econ. 60 (1), 81–98.
Adilov, N., Alexander, P.J., Cunningham, B.M., 2018. An economic Kessler Syndrome:
A dynamic model of earth orbit debris. Econom. Lett. 166 (1), 79–82.
Adilov, N., Alexander, P.J., Cunningham, B.M., 2020. The economics of orbital debris
generation, accumulation, mitigation, and remediation. J. Space Saf. Eng. 7,
447–450.
Australian Space Weather Agency, 1999. Satellite Orbital Decay Calculations. Sidney,
Australia.
Béal, S., Deschamps, M., Moulin, H., 2020. Taxing congestion of the space commons.
Acta Astronaut. 177, 313–319.
Bernhard, P., Deschamps, M., Zaccour, G., 2023. Large satellite constellations and
space debris: Exploratory analysis of strategic management of the space commons.
European J. Oper. Res. 304, 1140–1157.
BryceTech, 2020. Smallsats by the numbers 2020. In: Bryce Space and Technology.
BryceTech, 2022. Start-up space. Update on Investment in Commercial Space Ventures
2022. BryceTech, LLC.
Farinella, P., Cordelli, A., 1991. The proliferation of orbiting fragments: a simple
mathematical model. Sci. Glob. Secur. 2, 365–378.
Gallois, P., 1987. Life expectancy of communication satellites. Electron. Power 33 (9),
547–550.
Grzelka, Z., Wagner, J., 2019. Managing satellite debris in low-earth orbit: Incentivizing
ex ante satellite quality and ex post take-back programs. Environ. Resour. Econ.
74 (1), 319–336.
Guyot, J., Rouillon, S., 2022. Sustainable management of space activity in low Earth
orbit. Manuscript.
Hardin, G., 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162, 1243–1248.

𝐷𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑑 )𝐷𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑡 + 𝜔𝐿𝑡 + 𝜐𝐷𝑡2
where 𝜐 > 0. Given that 𝑋𝑡 = 𝜃𝐷𝑡 𝑆𝑡 and that 𝐿𝑡 = (𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑡 )𝑆𝑡 ∕𝜂, the
above expression can be written as,
𝐷𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑑 )𝐷𝑡 + 𝛾𝜃𝐷𝑡 𝑆𝑡 +

𝜔(𝛿𝑠 + 𝜃𝐷𝑡 )
𝑆𝑡 + 𝜐𝐷𝑡2
𝜂

In steady state, the above expression we have a second-order equation for debris as a function of the quantity of satellites,
𝛿𝑑 𝐷 = 𝛾𝜃𝐷𝑆 +

𝛿𝑑 − 𝜐𝐷
𝛾𝜃 + 𝜔𝜃
𝜂

𝜔𝛿𝑠
𝜔𝜃
𝑆+
𝐷𝑆 + 𝜐𝐷2
𝜂
𝜂
13

Ecological Economics 209 (2023) 107831

A. Bongers and J.L. Torres

OECD, 2020. Space sustainability: The economics of space debris in perspective. In:
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers. p. 87.
O’Neill, G.K., 1977. The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space. Willian Morrow and
Company, New York.
Ostrom, E., 2010. Beyond markets and states, polycentric governance of complex
economic systems. Am. Econ. Rev. 100 (1), 1–33.
Pardini, C., Anselmo, L., 2014. Review of past on-orbit collisions among cataloged
objects and examination of the catastrophic fragmentation concept. Acta Astronaut.
100, 30–39.
Patel, P., 2019. 4 Products to manufacture in orbit. In: IEEE Spectrum 2019.
Peeters, W., 2010. From suborbital space tourism to commercial personal spaceflight.
Acta Astronaut. 66, 1625–1632.
Prater, T., Werkheiser, N., Ledbetter, F., 2018. Toward a multimaterial fabrication
laboratory: In-space manufacturing as an enabling technology for long-endurance
human space flight. J. Br. Interplanet. Soc. 71, 27–35.
Rao, A., Burgess, M.G., Kaffine, D., 2020. Orbital-use fees could more than quadruple
the value of the space industry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 (23), 12756–12762.
Ross, S.D., 2002. Near-Earth Asteroid Mining. California Institute of Technology,
Unpublished manuscript.
Rouillon, S., 2020. A phsyco-economic model of low Earth orbit management. Environ.
Resour. Econ. 77 (4), 695–723.
Salop, S.C., 1979. Monopolistic competition with outside goods. Bell J. Econ. 10 (1),
141–156.
Sandler, T., Shulze, W., 1981. The economics of outer space. Nat. Resour. J. 21 (2),
371–393.
Snow, M.S., 1975. Investment cost minimization for communications satellite capacity:
Refinement and application of the Chenery-Manne-Srinivasan Model. Bell J. Econ.
6 (2), 621–643.
Weinzierl, M., 2018. Space, the final economic frontier. J. Econ. Perspect. 32, 173–192.
Weinzierl, M., Acocella, A., 2016. Blue origin, NASA, and new space. In: Harvard
Business School Case n. 012-716. pp. 1–34.
Weinzierl, M., Acocella, A., Yamazaki, M., 2016. Astroscale, space debris, and earth’s
orbital commons. In: Harvard Business School Case n. 037-716. pp. 1–24.

Johnson, N.L., Krisko, P.H., Liou, J.C., Anz-Meador, P.D., 2001. NASA’s new breakup
model of EVOLVE 4.0. Adv. Space Res. 28 (9), 1377–1384.
Kawamoto, S., Nagaoka, N., Hanada, T., 2019. Impact on collision probability by post
mission disposal and active debris removal. In: First International Orbital Debris
Conference.
Kessler, D.J., Cour-Palais, B.G., 1978. Collision frequency of artificial satellites: The
creation of a debris belt. J. Geophys. Res. 83 (6), 2637–2646.
King-Hele, D., 1987. Satellite orbits in an atmosphere. In: Theory and Applications.
Glasgow, Blackie.
Klima, R., Bloembergen, D., Savani, R., Tuyis, K., Hennes, D., Izzo, D., 2016. Space
debris removal: A game theoretic analysis. Games 7 (3), 20.
Krag, H., Serrano, M., Braun, V., Kuchynka, P., Catania, M., Simiski, J., Schimmerohn, M., Marc, X., Kujiper, D., Shurmer, I., O’Connell, A., Otten, M., Muñoz, I.,
Morales, J., Wermuth, M., McKissock, D., 2017. A 1 cm space debris impact onto
the Sentinel-1A solar array. Acta Astronaut. 137, 434–443.
Krisko, P., 2007. The predicted growth of the low-Earth orbit space debris environment
- An assessment of future risk for spacecraft. J. Aerosp. Eng. 221 (6), 975–985.
Letizia, F., Colombo, C., Lewis, H.G., Krag, H., 2017. Extending the ecog space debris
index with fragmentation risk estimation. In: Proc. 7th European Conference on
Space Debris, Darmstadt, Germany, 18–21 2017. published by the ESA Space Debris
Office.
Lewis, H.G., Swinerd, G.G., Newland, R.J., Saunders, A., 2009. The fast debris evolution
model. Adv. Space Res. 44, 568–578.
Liou, J.C., Johnson, N.L., 2006. Risks in space from orbiting debris. Science 311,
340–341.
Macauley, M.K., 2015. The economics of space debris: Estimating the costs and benefits
of debris mitigation. Acta Astronaut. 115, 160–164.
NASA, 2007. Detection of debris from Chinese ASAT test increases; One minor
fragmentation event in second quarter of 2007. Orbital Debris Q. Rev. 11 (3),
1–2.
NASA, 2020. The tracked objects in Low Earth Orbit: 2000–2020. Orbital Debris Q.
Rev. 24 (4), 11.

14

