IDS Business Support,
Communications and
Community Affairs
P.O. Box 516
St. Louis, MO 63166

Active Thermal Control System (ATCS) Overview

EEATCS (5A-12A.1)/EATCS (12A.1+)

Active Thermal Control System Architecture
Most of the Station's many systems produce waste heat, which needs to be transferred from the
ISS to space to achieve thermal control and maintain components at acceptable temperatures.
An Active Thermal Control System (ATCS) is required to achieve this heat rejection function
when the combination of the ISS external environment and the generated heat loads exceeds the
capabilities of the Passive Thermal Control System to maintain temperatures. An ATCS uses a
mechanically pumped fluid in closed-loop circuits to perform three functions: heat collection,
heat transportation, and heat rejection. Waste heat is removed in two ways, through cold plates
and heat exchangers, both of which are cooled by a circulating ammonia loops on the outside of
the station. The heated ammonia circulates through large radiators located on the exterior of the
Space Station, releasing the heat by radiation to space that cools the ammonia as it flows through
the radiators. .
The ATCS consists of the Internal Active Thermal Control System (IATCS), External Active
Thermal Control System (EATCS), the Photovoltaic Thermal Control System (PVTCS) and the
Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS). The IATCS consists of loops that
circulate water through the interior of the U.S. Destiny Laboratory module to collect the excess
heat from electronic and experiment equipment and distributes this heat to the Interface Heat
Exchangers for transfer to the EATCS. At assembly complete, there will be nine separate ITCS
water loops in the U.S. and International Partner pressurized modules.
The Photovoltaic Thermal Control System (PVTCS) consists of ammonia loops that collect
excess heat from the Electrical Power System (EPS) components in the Integrated Equipment
Assembly (IEA) on P4 and eventually S4 and transport this heat to the PV radiators (located on
P4, P6, S4 and S6) where it is rejected to space. The PVTCS consist of ammonia coolant, eleven
coldplates, two Pump Flow Control Subassemblies (PFCS) and one Photovoltaic Radiator
(PVR).
1

The External Active Thermal Control System (EATCS), activated for the first time on this
mission, consists of ammonia loops to collect heat from the Interface Heat Exchangers and
external electronic equipment mounted on coldplates and transports it to the S1 and P1 radiators
where it is rejected to space. In lieu of using the EATCS initially, the station hardware has been
cooled by the Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS). The EEATCS has
provided heat rejection capability rejection capability for the U.S. Laboratory Interface Heat
Exchangers(IFHX) since assembly flight 5A through 12a.1.
The EEATCS is the temporary system used to collect, transport, and reject waste heat from
habitable volumes on the International Space Station (ISS). The EEATCS collects heat from the
Interface Heat Exchangers (IFHX) located on the U.S. Laboratory module, circulates the
working fluid, anhydrous ammonia, via the Pump and Flow Control Subassembly (PFCS), and
rejects heat to space via two orthogonally oriented stationary radiators.

Internal Active Thermal Control System (IATCS)
The purpose of the U.S. Destiny Laboratory ITCS is to maintain equipment within an allowable
temperature range by collecting, transporting, and rejecting waste heat. The ITCS uses water
because it is an efficient thermal transport fluid and is safe inside a habitable module. The
IATCS is a closed loop system that provides a constant coolant supply to equipment, payloads
and avionics to maintain proper temperature.
The U.S. Laboratory contains two independent loops, a Low Temperature Loop (LTL) and a
Moderate Temperature Loop (MTL). This approach allows for segregation of the heat loads,
simplifies heat load management, and provides redundancy in case of equipment failure. The
LTL is designed to operate at 40° F (4° C) and service systems equipment requiring low
temperatures, such as the Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) Common
Cabin Air Assembly (CCAA) and some payload experiments. The LTL contains approximately
16.64 gallons (63 liters) of fluid. The MTL nominally operates at 63° F (17° C) and provides
most of the cooling for systems equipment (i.e. avionics) and payload experiments. The MTL
contains approximately 52.83 gallons (200 liters) of fluid. The IATCS loops can be configured
and operated as a single loop. This capability is used for a variety of purposes, including the
reduction of wear on the pumps, reduction of pump power usage, or to compensate for a pump
failure.

Photovoltaic Thermal Control System (PVTCS)
The PVTCS consist of ammonia coolant, eleven coldplates, two Pump Flow Control
Subassemblies (PFCS) and one Photovoltaic Radiator (PVR). The coldplate subassemblies are
an integral part of IEA structural framework. Heat is transferred from the IEA orbital
replacement unit (ORU) electronic boxes to the coldplates via fine interweaving fins located on
both the coldplate and the electronic boxes. The fins add lateral structural stiffness to the
coldplates in addition to increasing the available heat transfer area. The PFCS is the heart of the
thermal system. It consists of all the pumping capacity, valves and controls required to pump the
heat transfer fluid to the heat exchanges and radiator, and regulate the temperature of the thermal
control system ammonia coolant. The PVTCS can dissipate 6,000 Watts of heat per orbit on
average and is commanded by the IEA computer. Each PFCS consumes 275 Watts during
2

normal operations and measures approximately 40 inches (101.6 cm) by 29 inches (73.7 cm) by
19 inches (48.3 cm), weighing 235 pounds (106.7 kilograms).
The PVR – the radiator – is deployable on orbit and comprised of two separate flow paths
through seven panels. Each flow path is independent and is connected to one of the two PFCSs
on the IEA. In total, the PVR can reject up to 14 kW of heat into deep space. The PVR weighs
1,633 pounds (740.7 kilograms) and when deployed measures 10.24 feet (3.12 meters) by 44.62
feet (13.6 meters). When the ISS assembly is complete, there will be a total of four PVRs, one
for each PV module (S4, P4, P6, S6).

Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS)
Function
Since the U.S. Laboratory became operational before the permanent External Active Thermal
Control System (EATCS) was assembled, a temporary external cooling system was needed.
External cooling from the Russian segment is not possible because there are no operational
interfaces between the U.S. On-orbit Segment (USOS) and the Russian On-orbit Segment (ROS)
thermal systems. Instead, a modified version of the Photovoltaic Thermal Control System
(PVTCS) called the Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS) acts as a
temporary thermal system. The EEATCS consists of two independent, simultaneously operating
ammonia cooling loops (ACL). These loops transport heat loads from the Interface Heat
Exchanger (IFHX) located on the Laboratory module's aft endcone to the radiators located on
truss segment P6. The EEATCS is needed until the permanent EATCS is activated. Once the
permanent EATCS becomes operational on mission, the EEATCS will be deactivated. After
deactivation, portions of the EEATCS will be used as spare components for the PVTCS loops.
Hardware
Pump & Flow Control System (PFCS)
Each external loop contains a Pump & Flow Control System (PFCS) which contains most of the
controls and mechanical systems that drive the EEATCS. There are 2 pumps per PFCS which
circulate ammonia throughout the external coolant loops and a Flow Control Valve (FCV) which
mixes cold radiator flow and warm IFHX return flow to regulate the temperature of the ammonia
in the loop. The PFCS also contains the primary ammonia accumulator, which provides limited
ammonia leakage makeup, protection against thermal expansion of the ammonia, and a net
positive suction head greater than the minimum required to prevent pump cavitations.
Additionally, all manner of pressure, temperature, flow, and quantity sensors used by the
EEATCS are part of the PFCS.
Radiators

3

The EEATCS radiator ORU is a direct flow, deployable and retractable radiator system with two
independent cooling loops. The EEATCS radiator consists of seven radiator panels, the
deploy/retract mechanism, support structure, and the necessary plumbing. The EEATCS radiator
has two channels (A & B) that acquire heat from the Lab Low Temperature (LT) and Moderate
Temperature (MT) Loop Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX) via liquid anhydrous ammonia. The
ammonia flows from the PFCS to the associated IFHX, to the EEATCS radiator manifold tubes,
across the radiator panels and back to the PFCS. The radiator panels reject the excess heat to
space via two non-articulating EEATCS radiator ORUs: one AFT (Trailing) and one Starboard
(Normal). The two radiator ORUs are located on the P6 Long Spacer Truss Segment. The
radiator measures 10.24 feet (3.12 meters) by 44.62 feet (13.6 meters).
Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX)
The Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX) units accomplish heat transfer from the IATCS water
coolant loops to the external ammonia coolant loops. At assembly complete configuration of the
ISS, 10 interface heat exchangers will be in operation to provide heat transfer from the IATCS
loops of the various habitable modules to the two external ammonia coolant loops. The IFHX
units are located on the U.S. Laboratory, Node 2, and Node 3.

4

External Active Thermal Control System (EATCS) Overview

The EATCS provides heat rejection capabilities for all U.S. pressurized modules and the main
power distribution electronics on S0, S1 and P1. The system uses a single-phase anhydrous
ammonia as its working fluid for its high thermal capacity and wide range of operating
temperatures. Ammonia has an extremely low freezing point of -107 degrees ° F (-77 °C) at
standard atmospheric pressure. The EATCS is comprised of two independent loops labeled loop
A on S1 (Starboard) and Loop B on P1 (Port). The independent loops were designed so that a
failure in one would not take down the entire EATCS system. Both loops are physically
separated to prevent orbital debris from taking out the lines and the fluid transport lines are
buried within the truss structure. If a loop does go down, the EATCS operates at a reduced
capacity. Each loop collects heat from up to five Interface Heat Exchangers (IFHXs) mounted
on the Node 2, U.S. Destiny Laboratory, and Node 3 as well as externally mounted coldplates.
Most of the cold plates and plumbing to the pressurized modules are located on the S0 center
truss. The EATCS is designed to provide 35 kW of heat rejection per loop for a total capability
of 70 kW. The EATCS also provides ammonia re-supply capability to the Photovoltaic Thermal
Control Systems (PVTCS) located on P4, P6, S4 and S6. All EATCS components are located
outside the pressurized volumes to prevent crew contact with ammonia.
At assembly complete, each ammonia loop will supply coolant to five Interface Heat Exchangers
(IFHX) and five cold plates (three Direct Current-to-Direct Current Units (DDCUs) and two
Main Bus Switch Units (MBSUs)). Two MBSU cold plates, each designed to remove 495 watts
at 80 lbs/hr. Three DDCU cold plates are each designed to remove 694 watts at 125 lbs/hr. The
cold plate interfaces with the component base-plate via radiant fins. IFHXs transfer thermal
5

energy from the Internal Thermal Control System’s (ITCS) water based coolant to the ETCS
anhydrous ammonia coolant. Ammonia supply temperature is currently set at 37 °F (2.8 °C)
The ITCS supply temperature varies as a function of the modules’ thermal load. IFHX can
isolate and bypass the IFHX core on the ammonia side in the event a cold slug is detected at the
pump outlet to prevent ITCS coolant from freezing.
Key Components:
The External Active Thermal Control System (EATCS) is the primary permanent active heat
rejection system on ISS. It acquires, transports, and rejects excess heat from all U.S. and
International Partner modules except the Russian modules. The EATCS contains two ammonia
coolant loops, which cool equipment on the S0, S1, and P1 truss segments. Capable of rejecting
up to 70kW, the EATCS provides a substantial upgrade in heat rejection capacity from the 14kW
capability of the Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS).
Heat Acquisition Subsystem (HAS)
The HAS consists of the Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX) Orbital Replacement Units (ORU),
Main Bus Switch Unit (MBSU) and DC-to-DC Converter Unit (DDCU) cold plates ORU.
Heat Rejection Subsystem (HRS)
The HRS consists of the radiator ORU, which is a deployable, eight-panel system that rejects
thermal energy via radiation. The HRS also consists of the Radiator Beam Valve Module
(RBVM) that provides radiator isolating or venting, radiator beam which carries three radiators
and connects to the Thermal Radiator Rotary Joint (TRRJ), which rotates to the radiator beam to
provide radiator articulation. The EATCS allows the flow of ammonia through heat rejection
radiators that constantly rotate to optimize cooling for the station.

6

Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX)

Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHX) provide the interface between the ITCS and the EATCS
The Interface Heat Exchanger (IFHXs) provide the interface between a module’s internal TCS
and the EATCS. The IFHXs transfer heat from the internal loops of the USOS modules to the
EATCS ammonia loops. IFHXs are used to collect heat from USOS modules. There are five
IFHXs for each EATCS loop. Some IFHXs are plumbed in series such that the cool ammonia
flows through a module’s Low Temperature Loop (LTL) IFHX prior to flowing though another
module’s Moderate Temperature Loop (MTL) IFHX.
The IFHX units accomplish heat transfer from the IATCS water coolant loops to the external
ammonia coolant loops. Each IFHX core utilizes a counterflow design with 45 alternating
layers. IATCS water flows through 23 of the layers, while EATCS ammonia flows through the
22 alternate layers in the opposite direction. These alternating layers of relatively warm water
and relatively cold ammonia help to maximize the heat transfer between the two fluids via
conduction and convection. The heat exchanger core is a simple flow through device with no
command or telemetry capability. IFHXs are mounted on the Node 2, U.S. Laboratory, and
Node 3. The U.S. Laboratory IFHXs have been connected to the EEATCS, until this flight, when
the EEATCS ammonia fluid line quick-disconnect will be disconnected and reconnected to the
EATCS. When Node 2 arrives on Assembly Flight 10A, it is equipped with six IFHXs designed
to provide cooling for itself, the Columbus and Japanese Experiment Module. Node 3 also
contains a set of IFHXs, which are connected to the EATCS when it arrives on Assembly Flight
20A.
At the assembly complete configuration of the ISS, 10 interface heat exchangers will be in
operation to provide heat transfer from the IATCS loops of the various habitable modules to the
two external ammonia coolant loops. The IFHX units will be located on the U.S. Laboratory,
Node 2, and Node 3. Because of the highly toxic nature of ammonia, IFHX ORUs are mounted
7

external to the pressurized modules as a safety precaution. Each IFHX measures 25 inches
(63.50 cm) by 21 inches (53.34 cm) by 8 inches (20.32 cm) and weighs about 91 pounds (41.28
kilograms).
Heaters
Each EATCS loop has electrically powered heaters wrapped around the supply and return fluid
lines on the S0 Truss to maintain the minimum operating temperature. These heaters are used
during low heat load conditions and are turned on and off by software in the
Multiplexer/Demultiplexer (MDMs). These heaters can be operated in closed-loop mode
(temperature based) or open-loop mode (time based). Numerous heaters are located on the
EATCS plumbing on the S1 (Loop A) and P1 (Loop B) truss segments to prevent ammonia
freezing and flexible hose damage during nonoperational periods. These heaters are
thermostatically controlled and have no software interface.
Cold Plate
Each ETCS loop provides cooling
to externally mounted coldplates
located on the S0, S1 (Loop A),
and P1 (Loop B) truss segment.
These coldplates contain Electrical
Power System (EPS) equipment
used to convert and distribute
power to downstream ISS loads.
Each ammonia loop contains four
coldplates, two attached to Direct
Current-to-Direct Current
Converter Units (DDCUs) and two
attached to Main Bus Switching
Units (MBSUs). Each MBSU
coldplate measures 37 inches
(93.98 cm) by 33 inches (83.8 cm)
by 20 inches (50.8 cm) and weighs about
109 pounds (49.4 kilograms).

Main Bus Switching Unit (MBSU) Coldplate

8

Electrical Connectors (2)

Ammonia QDs (2)

Direct Current-to-Direct Current Converter Units (DDCU) Cold Plate
Each coldplate ORU is connected to the EATCS ammonia loop by self-sealing quick disconnect
(QD) couplings and contains a finned coldplate, two or three strip heaters and temperature
sensor. The coldplates are installed such that the fins of the coldplate are positioned adjacent to
corresponding fins on either the DDCU or the MBSU to facilitate heat transfer by radiation
between the cooled equipment and the coldplate. Each DDCU coldplate measures 35 inches
(88.9 cm) by 28 inches (71.12 cm) by 31 inches (78.74 cm) inches and weighs about 96 pounds
(43.54 kilograms).
Pump Module (PM)
Circulation, loop pressurization, and temperature control of the ammonia is provided by the
Pump Module (PM). Each ammonia loop contains a Pump Module Assembly (PM) ORU to
provide flow and accumulator functions and maintains proper temperature control at the pump
outlet. Each PM consists of a single pump, a fixed charge accumulator, a Pump & Control Valve
Package (PCVP) containing a firmware controller, startup heaters, isolation valves, and various
sensors for monitoring performance. The accumulator within the PM works in concert with the
Ammonia Tank Assembly (ATA) tanks to compensate for expansion and contraction of

9

The Pump Module ORU circulates liquid ammonia at a constant flowrate to a network of
coldplates and heat exchangers located on the external trusses and U.S. modules,
respectively.
ammonia caused by the temperature changes and keeps the ammonia in the liquid phase via a
fixed charge of pressurized nitrogen gas on the backside of its bellows.
The Pump Module (PM) provides fluid pumping, fluid temperature control and system pressure
control. The PCVP provides flow control. A single pump in the PCVP provides circulation of
the ammonia. The Flow Control Valve (FCV) located within the PCVP regulates the temperature
of the ammonia. The FCV mixes “cool” ammonia exiting the radiators with “warm” ammonia
that has bypassed the radiators.
Nominally, loop A will operate at 8,200 lb/hr and loop B at 8,900 lb/hr at 14,000 and 14,700
revolutions per minute, respectively. For STS-116, initial activation with U.S. Laboratory IFHX
where Loop A pump will run at 11,500 rpm, equivalent to 5,000 lb/hr while Loop B pump will
run at 11,500 rpm which is equivalent to 5,200 lb/hr.
The accumulator located in the PM provides auxiliary pressure control. The accumulator resides
upstream of the PCVP in each PM ORU. The accumulator keeps the ammonia in the liquid phase
by maintaining the pressure above the vapor pressure of ammonia and provides makeup
ammonia in case of a leak. The accumulator works in conjunction with the ATA to absorb
fluctuations in the fluid volume due to varying heat loads through the expansion and contraction
of its internal bellows.
Nominal operating pressure for the loops is 300 psia at the pump inlet; the pressure will be
brought up to 390 psia for start up. The maximum system design pressure is 500 psia.
Each PM measures 69 inches (175.26 cm) by 50 inches (127 cm) by 36 inches (.91 cm) inches
and weighs about 780 pounds (353.8 kilograms).
Low and High Pressure flow Control Monitoring

10

Failure Detection, Isolation and Recovery (FDIR) for high and low pressure conditions are
monitored and issued by the S1/P1 Multiplexer/Demultiplexers (MDMs). For an over pressure,
gaseous nitrogen pressure is relieved down to 360 psia when pump inlet pressure reaches 415
psia (active control). The PVCP Inlet pressure, Radiator return pressure, and Bypass return
pressure sensors are part of this system and two of three pressure readings are used to determine
if an overpressure condition exists. The pump will shut down issued when the pump outlet
pressure reaches 480 psia (active control). Various relief valves and burst disks at the IFHX,
PM, and RBVM will relieve at approximately 70 psia (passive control)
Low pressure (current limit set at 170 psia) is monitored by two methods to determine a low
pressure condition (chooses higher of the two values to determine the limit). Low pressure
conditions are monitored using the PVCP inlet pressure, radiator return pressure, and bypass
return pressure sensors.
Temperature Control
The PCVP also maintains temperature set point control of the ammonia supplied to the HAS.
The PCVP has a temperature control capability of 36 °F (2.2 °C) to 43 °F (6.1 °C) and it will be
set at 37 °F ± 2 °F (2.8 °C). The temperature control method is by three way mixing valve that
mixes flow from the radiators and the HRS Bypass. Heaters on the HRS Bypass leg provide an
additional level of control. Heaters are used to provide fluid conditioning in the event the
thermal load on the loop is not sufficient to maintain set point control and to support temporary
transient events. Total heater power of 1.8 kW is split across two heater strips mounted on the
HRS bypass lines (900 watts each).
Pump outlet over temperature protection is provided by a Firmware Controller (FWC) in the
PCVP that uses three PCVP outlet sensors to determine an over temp condition and issues zero
pump speed. The S1/P1 MDMs use the PM outlet sensor to determine an over temp condition
and pull power from the Solenoid Driver Output (SDO) card providing power to the PM.
Current limit is set at 65 °F (18.33 °C). Freeze Protection in the IFHX is detected by the PCVP
firmware which shuts down the pump (first leg). When an under temperature condition is
detected by the S1/P1 MDMs, it will pull power from the SDO card providing power to the PM
(second leg). Under temperature detected by the S0 1,2 MDMs pulls power from the utility rail
(third leg, leaves many things without power). The current limit is set at 35 °F (1.67 °C).

11

Fluid Supply

Ammonia re-supply capability for the EATCS and the eight PVTCS located on P6, P4, S4 and
S6 is provided by the Ammonia Tank Assembly (ATA).
Each ammonia loop contains an ATA ORU to contain the heat transfer fluid (liquid ammonia)
used by the EATCS loops. There is one ATA per loop located on the zenith side of the S1 (Loop
A) and P1 (Loop B) truss segments. The ATA ORU will be used to fill the EATCS loop on
startup, to supply makeup fluid to the system, to act as an accumulator in concert with the PM
accumulator and provide the
capability to vent the
ammonia loops by way of a
connection to an external
non-propulsive vent. Each
ATA primarily consists of
two bellows ammonia tanks
pressurized by an external
nitrogen source, two internal
survival heaters and two sets
of quantity, differential
pressure, absolute pressure
and temperature sensors. The
ATAs are isolatable and
replaceable on orbit.
Multilayer Insulation (MLI)
applied to the exterior
surfaces of the ORU is
provided to guard against
excessive heat loss. The ATA
ORU is protected against
Micro-Meteoroid/Orbital
Debris (MM/OD) by
shielding on the exterior of each tank and the ORU itself. Each ATA measures 79 inches
12

(200.66 cm) by 46 inches(116.84 cm) by 55 inches (139.7 cm) inches and weighs about 1,120
pounds (508.02 kilograms).
The ATA in combination with the Nitrogen Tank Assembly (NTA) provide fluid supply and
primary system pressure control. A single ATA was launched on Flights 9A and 11A (ITS S1
and P1) with approximately 640 lbm ammonia in each ATA, 320 lbm per tank. ATA provides
necessary plumbing connection to the ammonia vent system via the vent panel. Supply to
outboard trusses is provided through the vent panel. The ATA acts as the primary accumulator
for the EATCS in concert with the NTA. If required, it can also be used to replenish the PVTCS
fluid lines.
Each ammonia loop
contains a NTA ORU to
provide storage for the
high pressure nitrogen
used for controlled
pressurization of the
ATA. The NTA mounts to
the S1 (Loop A) and P1
(Loop B) truss segments
and is connected to the
ATA by self-sealing QDs.
Each NTA ORU primarily
consists of a nitrogen
tank, a gas pressure
regulating valve (GPRV),
isolation valves and
survival heaters. The
nitrogen tank provides a
storage volume for the
high-pressure gaseous nitrogen, while the GPRV provides a pressure control function as well as
nitrogen isolation and over pressure protection of downstream components. The NTA provides
the necessary pressure to move the ammonia out of the ATA. The single high-pressure tank
containing nitrogen at 2,500 psia (@70 °F, ground fill) and uses the GPRV to supply continuous
pressure up to 390 psia in one psia increments. A back-up mechanical valve limits the maximum
nitrogen pressure to 416 psia. The GPRV provides pressure control as well as high-pressure
nitrogen isolation and overpressure protection of downstream components. The NTA has venting
capabilities and over pressure controls. Each NTA measures 64 inches (162.56 cm) by 36
inches (91.44) by 30 inches (76.2 cm) inches and weighs about 460 pounds (208.65 kilograms).
Fluid Lines and Quick Disconnects (QD):
Fluid lines and external QDs provide the transportation path from the truss segments to the
IFHXs. Connections between segments are made with flex hoses and QDs. There are flex hoses
and QDs between each truss, and between the S0 truss and the various IFHXs.

13

Heat Rejection System

Heat Rejection System
(HRS) Radiator during
deployment testing at
Lockheed Martin Missiles
and Fire Control.

Heat collected by the EATCS ammonia loops is radiated to space by two sets of rotating radiator
wings—each composed of three separate radiator ORUs. Each radiator ORU is composed of
eight panels, squib units, squib unit firmware controller, Integrated Motor Controller Assemblies
(IMCAs), instrumentation, and QDs. Each Radiator ORU measures 76.4 feet (23.3 meters) by
11.2 feet (3.4 meters) and weighs 2,475 pounds (1,122.64 kilograms)
Each ammonia loop
contains one radiator
wing comprised of
three Radiator ORUs
mounted on the
Radiator Beam and
six Radiator Beam
Valve Modules
(RBVM)and one
Thermal Radiator
Rotary Joint (TRRJ).
The Radiator ORUs
utilize anhydrous
ammonia to reject
heat from the EATCS.
Each Radiator ORU
contains a deployment
mechanism and eight
radiator panels. The
deployment
mechanism allows the Radiator ORU to be launched in a stowed configuration and deployed on
orbit. Each radiator ORU can be remotely deployed and retracted.

14

Each individual radiator has two
separate coolant flow paths. Each
flow path flows through all eight
radiator panels. Each panel’s
flow path has eleven flow tubes
for a total of 22 Inconel flow
tubes or passages (11 passages
per flow path) per radiator panel;
flow tubes are freeze tolerant.
Flow tubes are connected along
the edge of each panel by
manifolds. Flex hoses connect
the manifold tubes between
panels. Each panel has a white
(Z-93) coating which provides
optimum thermo-optical
properties to maximize heat
rejection. Flow tube
arrangement is designed to minimize ammonia freezing in the radiator.

Shown here is
the flow path in
one of the panels
of the Radiator

There are two
RBVMs (one
per flow path)
that allow or
prevent the
transfer of
ammonia to
and from the
radiator panels.

Each radiator path contains one Radiator Beam Valve Module (RBVM) as a part of the
radiator wing. Six RBVMs are mounted on the radiator beams on the S1 and P1 truss segments.
Two RBVMs service each radiator ORU. Each RBVM consists of an isolation relief valve, an
isolation valve, an Integrated Motor Controller Assembly (IMCA), QDs, and pressure and
temperature sensors. The RBVM controls the transfer of ammonia between the Radiator
Assembly ORU and the rest of the EATCS loop. Each RBVM contains sensors to monitor
absolute pressure, temperature and valve position within the ORU. Remote control venting of the
radiator fluid loop is also available through the RBVM to facilitate radiator replacement and
prevent freezing of the ATCS coolant during contingency operations. The RBVM provides flow
path isolation in the event that a panel suffers micro-meteoroid damage. Leak isolation FDIR
functions are controlled by the S1/P1 MDMs monitoring large leaks via the STR/PTR MDMs.
Additionally, the RBVM provides automatic pressure relief when the EATCS is over
15

pressurized. Each RBVM weighs about 50 pounds (22.68 kilograms) and measures 24 inches
(60.96 cm) by 20 inches (50.8 cm) x 5.4 inches (13.72 cm).
The rotation capability for each radiator assembly is provided through a Thermal Radiator
Rotary Joint (TRRJ). The TRRJ provides power, data, and liquid ammonia transfer to the
rotating radiator beam while providing structural support for the radiator panels. Each TRRJ is
composed of the following: a bearing assembly, two Rotary Joint Motor Controllers (RJMCs),
two Drive Lock Assemblies (DLAs), a Flex Hose Rotary Coupler (FHRC), and a Power and
Data Transfer Assembly (PDTA). The bearing assembly is the rotary interface and primary
structural component of the TRRJ. The RJMCs provide control for the DLA system, which
provides joint rotation and joint locking capability. The FHRC consists of four flex hoses, two
supply and two return. The PDTA provides the data and power paths for transfer to and from the
radiator beam.

Thermal Radiator Rotary Joint (TRRJ) provides controlled rotation of the EATCS radiators,
allows the transfer of power, data, and ammonia across the rotating interface, and provides the
structural support between the S1/P1 truss segments and the associated radiator wing assembly.
TRRJ ORU provides rotation capability to the Radiator Beam to optimize the thermal
environment of the radiators and to maximize heat rejection capability and prevent freezing in
the radiator manifolds. Rotation angles are determined via the Radiator Goal Angle Calculation
(RGAC) algorithm which commands the Radiator Beam to put the radiators either “edge to the
sun” during isolation phase of the orbit or “face to the Earth” during the eclipse phase. The
RGAC ensures the radiators stay cold enough so the heat can be rejected but warm enough so
that the ammonia does not freeze. There is a temperature goal of –40 °F at the radiator outlet.
The FHRC provides the transfer of liquid ammonia across the rotary joint and is capable of
rotating 230 degrees, at ±115 degrees from its neutral position. (software command limit is
±105°); with a variable rotation speed of 0 to 45 degrees-per-minute. Each TRRJ measures
16

approximately 5.6 feet (1.7 meters) by 4.6 feet (1.4 meters) by 4.3 feet (1.3 meters) and weighs
927 pounds (420.5 kilograms),
System Performance Overview
Loop A and B operate at slightly different flow rates mainly due to differing system hydraulic
resistance layout. . Actual heat rejection will need to be planned and coordinated between all
modules so as not to exceed the EATCS total heat rejection capability of 70 kW (at assembly
complete), including S1/P1/S0 mounted electrical equipment.
Software
Thermal Control System (TCS) software is used to control and monitor the system. The TCS
software executes actions such as system startup, loop reconfiguration, and valve positioning for
flow and temperature control automatically or via commands from crew laptops or ground
workstations. Telemetry from the various temperature, pressure, flow, and quantity sensors is
monitored by TCS software and displayed on crew laptops or ground workstations. In addition,
Fault Detection, Isolation, and Recovery (FDIR) software is used to monitor the performance of
the TCS and, if there is a problem, alert the crew and flight controllers. In some cases, FDIR
software initiates recovery actions.
EATCS Activation
With the solar arrays attached by the shuttle Atlantis' crew in September, NASA is ready with
STS-116 to start generating enough power so that the permanent cooling system can be brought
on line. NASA will have to bring up the permanent electrical power distribution system on line
first before activating EATCS. The goal is to power up the MBSUs, route power through them
to the cooling system and gets that system activated before the MBSUs can overheat. The
EATCS has never been tested as an entire integrated system in its on-orbit configuration.
However, NASA and Boeing engineers did conduct an entire loop test, but it did not have a
rotating Radiator.
During STS-116/Assembly flight 12A.1, during the second and third spacewalks, the EATCS is
activated as part of the entire reconfiguration. There are two major power domains, 1/4 and 2/3.
During EVA 2, the 2/3 power domain reconfiguration takes place and loop B is activated and
then on EVA 3, the 1/4 power domain reconfiguration takes place and loop A is activated. Both
power-on and power-off are major reconfigurations, when half the station power is turned off for
periods of time. NASA has implemented a large number of procedures to account for the
situation where they are zero-fault tolerate. The key to each EVA is activation of the pump
modules and getting the system started for the first time. Assuming a nominal activation, there
are approximately 24 procedure steps to activate the EATCS for the first time.
Preparations to activate the EATCS start when the ground filled nitrogen pad is vented from the
center radiators and the rest of the system (to be vented after STS-116 reaches orbit). The
system is presently pressured with about 80 psia of nitrogen. The next step will be to introduce
ammonia into the system with only one radiator ORU per loop plumbed, which will take several
hours. Filling and activating the system will be one of the major challenges that mission
controllers and engineers will face. Activation will take about an hour for each loop. If there
17

were an anomaly during filling such as pressure begins to drop like a leak, then the entire
reconfiguration would be interrupted. Mission controllers have thoroughly rehearsed their
procedures to identify any potential leaks in the system. Some minor leaks are possible. Early
activation will provide cooling to the MBSUs and DDCUs (their respective cold plates) on S1,
S0 and P1. The activation sequence also allows for a through checkout of the EATCS loops prior
to connecting the U.S. Destiny Laboratory IFHX to the EATCS. The US Laboratory IFHXs will
continue to be cooled via the Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS) located
on P6 Long Spacer.
During the 12A.1 stage, EVAs will be conducted to connect the U.S. Laboratory IFHXs to the
EATCS. After the IFHXs are connected to the EATCS, the EEATCS will enter a dormancy
phase.
On Assembly Mission 10A/STS-120, the two remaining radiator ORUs per wing are deployed
and filled. Node 2 end-cones are connected to the EATCS via the starboard and port, boom trays
located on the forward end of S0. Pump shut down will be required. All six IFHXs on Node 2
receive cooling from the EATCS: two for Node 2, two for Attached Pressurized Module (APMColumbus), and two for Japanese Experiment Module (JEM-Kibo). The APM and JEM IFHXs
remain in a bypassed and isolated configuration to prevent accidental freezing of the water side
core of the IFHXs.
On Assembly Flight 20A/STS-132, the Node 3 end-cone is connected to the EATCS via jumpers
from the US Laboratory aft end-cone. A bypass line with an isolation valve on the US
Laboratory Aft end-cone allows the fluid circuit to be completed prior to Node 3 arrival. Upon
Node 3 arrival, the end-cone connection and activation the bypass-Isolation valves on US Lab
end-cone are closed. This mission completes the EATCS loop architecture.
Boeing engineers in Huntington Beach, Calif. designed the EATCS as well as S0, S1 and P1
which contains most of the EATCS hardware. Major subcontractors to Boeing were Hamilton
Sundstrand (PCVP, coldplates, core for heat exchanger), Honeywell (tanks, accumulator,
RBVMs), Lockheed Martin (radiators) and Marotta (valves).

18

Component Reference Drawings

Component locations on S1/P1

Component locations on S1/P1

19

